ADVANCED VISUALISATION OF BIG DATA FOR AGRICULTURE AS PART OF DATABIO
DEVELOPMENT
Karel Charvat1, Tomas Reznik2, Vojtech Lukas3, Karel Charvat Junior1, Karel Jedlicka4, Raul Palma5,
Raitis Berzins6
1

Lesprojekt sluzby, Martinov, Zaryby, The Czech Republic
Masaryk University, Faculty of Science, Department of Geography, Brno, The Czech Republic
3
Mendel University, Faculty of Agronomy, Department of Agrosystems and Bioclimatology, Brno,
Czech Republic
4
University of West Bohemia, Faculty of Applied Sciences, Department of Geomatics, Pilsen, The
Czech Republic
5
Poznan Supercomputing Centre, Poznan, Poland
6
Baltic Open Solutions Center, Riga, Latvia
2

result in incompatibilities. In order to plan and make
economically and environmentally sound decisions a
combination and management of information is needed [1].
DataBio (Data-Driven Bioeconomy) project [2] aims at
demonstrating the benefits of Big Data technologies in raw
material production in agriculture, forestry and
fishery/aquaculture for the bioeconomy industry to produce
food, energy and biomaterials responsibly and sustainably.
DataBio project re-uses and further develops the FOODIE
project results [3]. DataBio deploys a state of the art big data
platform “on top of the existing partners” infrastructure and
solutions - the Big DataBio Platform. The Big DataBio
Platform also comprises experts from bioeconomy and
technology research institutes, end users, technology
providers, and other partners. Furthermore, associated
partners and other stakeholders are also actively involved in
the pilots to verify the Big DataBio platform capabilities.
The Big data technology (BDT) is a new technological
paradigm that is driving the entire economy, including lowtech industries such as agriculture where it is implemented
under the banner of precision farming (PF). Following the
BDT and PF schemes, a Big data analytics system then
provides farm managers with highly localized descriptive,
prescriptive, and predictive plans. Descriptive plans offer
better and more advanced way of looking at an operation,
while prescriptive plans provide timely recommendations for
operation improvement, i.e. seed, fertilizer and other
agricultural inputs application rates, soil analysis, and
localized weather and disease/pest reports, based on realtime and historical data. Finally, predictive plans use current
and historical data sets to forecast future localized events
and returns. The following sections focus on three new

ABSTRACT
There is an increasing tension in agriculture between the
requirements to assure full safety on the one hand and keep
costs under control on the other hand, both with respect to
(inter)national strategies. Farmers need to measure and
understand the impact of huge amount and variety of data
which drive overall quality and yield in their fields. Among
others, those are local weather data, Global Navigation
System of Systems data, orthophotos and satellite imagery,
data on soil specifics etc. A strong need to secure Big Data
arises due to various repositories and heterogeneous sources.
Data storage and visualisation requirements are in some
cases competing as they are a common interest as well as a
threat that helps one part of a value chain to gain a higher
profit. As demonstrated in this paper, handling (Big) data is
therefore a sensitive topic, where trust of producers on data
security is essential.
Index Terms — precision agriculture, big data, yield
productivity zones, visualisation
1. INTRODUCTION
The agriculture sector is of strategic importance for
(European) society and economy. Due to its complexity,
agri-food operators have to manage many different and
heterogeneous sources of information. (Precision)
Agriculture requires collection, storage, sharing, and
analysis of large quantities of spatially and non-spatially
referenced data. These data flows currently present a hurdle
to uptake of precision agriculture as the multitude of data
models, formats, interfaces and reference systems in use

978-1-5386-7150-4/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE

415

IGARSS 2018

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Nebraska - Lincoln. Downloaded on March 20,2023 at 11:56:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

domains of Big Data Visualisation and Analysis for
Agriculture:
•
yield predictions (see section 2);
•
analysis and visualisation of Agriculture Linked
Open Data (RDF, see section 3);
•
3D visualisation and analysis of agricultural data
(see section 4).

in individual scenes to the mean value of the plots and, in
the next step, as the aggregation of all scenes into one layer.
Fig. 1 depicts yield productivity zones prediction together
with yield maps of spring barley for year 2017 for the
Rostěnice Farm in the Czech Republic.

2. YIELD PRODUCTIVITY ZONES
Estimating potential crop yield is a crucial activity
performed in the assessment of seasonal production. In
contrast, universal indirect methods are also being
elaborated for the assessment of actual crop growth and
yield based on remote sensing (see e.g. [4], [5] [6] or [7]).
Their main motivation is to establish a model based on
vegetative indices that is capable of identifying highly
productive and less productive zones within a plot, which
are linked to the actual or potential crop yield.
The concept of yield productivity zones was introduced in
the FOODIE project and further developed in the DataBio
project. It aims at the discovery, verification, and userfriendly visualisation of long-term high and low yield
productivity zones, as they are areas where crop yield has
been significantly above or below the average yield for the
whole plot for several years, and because they require the
site specific tailoring of fertilizer application rates to ensure
the most efficient use of nutrients for the determined level of
yield production. In addition, the identification of such
zones can help to minimize environmental pollution by
residues of agrochemical substances (fertilizers, pesticides).
Addressing within-field spatial variability by delineating
yield productivity zones is crucial for site specific crop
management in precision agriculture [8] and follows the
concept of sustainable food production ([9] as well as [10]).
The term “long-term” in this context means for as long as
agronomical practices do not change significantly, i.e. they
remain comparable. The motivations to discover high/low
crop yield productivity zones are therefore economic and
environmental – to increase profitability by saving on
fertilizer, fuel, and manpower on the one hand, and to avoid
the overuse of agrochemicals in order to reduce soil and/or
water pollution on the otherhand.
The calculation of yield productivity is based on the
relationship between vegetation indices from satellite data
and crop yield recorded during harvest. The ESPA
repository of LANDSAT satellite images and Copernicus
Open Access Hub were used as the main data sources
offering surface reflectance products, main vegetation
indices (NDVI, EVI) and clouds identification by the
CFmask algorithm. A selection of scenes from recent eight
years was made for specific farm area to collect cloud-free
data related to the second half of vegetation period. Yield
productivity zones were calculated as the relation of a pixel

Fig. 1. Yield productivity zone prediction derived from
satellite images (left) and the map of yield measurements as
computed by a harvester (right).
3. OPEN DATA MODEL
Linked data are increasingly becoming one of the most
popular methods for publishing data on the Web. There are
various reasons for that: on the one hand, linked data define
simple principles for publishing and interlinking structured
data that is accessible by both humans and machines.
Improving the data accessibility lowers the barriers on
finding and reusing such data, while providing machinereadable data facilitating the integration of such data into
different applications. On the other hand, linked data allow
to discover more useful data through the connections with
other datasets, and to exploit it in a more useful way through
semantic queries. As a result, there is a growing number of
datasets becoming available in linked data format, as can be
seen in the Linking Open Data cloud diagram [11], which
includes in its latest version (26 January 2017) more than
1100 datasets. Although large cross-domains datasets exist
(like dbpedia or freebase) and also some domains are
already well covered, like Geography, Government, and
Bioinformatics, this is still not the case for agricultural
related data. Relevant thesauri may be discovered, like
AGROVOC from FAO (Food and Agriculture Organisation)
or the National Agricultural Library’s Agricultural
Thesaurus (NALT). Nevertheless, there is still a lack of
datasets related to the agricultural facilities and farm
management activities. This is in part due to the lack of
standardized models for the representation of such data.
The FOODIE project addressed such issue with the
development of the FOODIE data model [12]. To ensure the

416
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Nebraska - Lincoln. Downloaded on March 20,2023 at 11:56:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

maximum degree of data interoperability, the model follows
and extends the INSPIRE (INfrastructure for SPatial
InfoRmation in Europe) generic data models, especially the
data model for Agricultural and Aquaculture Facilities (AF).
For instance, a feature was added into the generic INSPIRE
data models on a more detailed level than Site. The key
motivation was to represent a continuous area of agricultural
land with one type of crop species, cultivated by one user in
one farming mode (conventional vs. transitional vs. organic
farming). Such concept is called Plot and represents the
main element in the model since it is the level to which the
majority of agro data is related. The Management Zone
feature is even one more level lower than the Plot feature.
The Management Zone feature enables a more precise
description of the land characteristics in fine-grained areas.
Additionally, the FOODIE data model [12] includes
concepts for crop and soil data, treatments, interventions,
agriculture machinery, etc. Moreover, the model re-uses data
types defined in ISO standards (among others, ISO 19101,
ISO/TS 19103, ISO 8601 and ISO 19115) as well as
standardization efforts published under the INSPIRE
Directive (like structure of unique identifiers). The FOODIE
data model was specified in UML (as the INSPIRE models)
as well as transformed into an OWL (Ontology Web
Language) ontology in order to enable the publication of
linked data compliant with FOODIE data model [13].

impact of changes of various phenomena on the traffic
volume (see also Fig. 2). More details on cartographic
visualization may be found in [16].

Fig. 2. Interactive cartographic visualization of agricultural
machinery monitoring. It allows users to filter according to
days, hours of a day, speed of a tractor, fuel consumption
etc.
The second visualisation technique allows users to
explore yield productivity zones with respect to topography
(represented as DTM – Digital Terrain Model, DSM –
Digital Surface Model, slope, slope orientation, and
topography wetness index) according to [17]. A so-called
perspective view was implemented in the application. The
perspective view contains a three dimensional model of the
farm plots and shows the area of interest in a perspective
projection taking into account the observer position and his
or her line of sight (see Fig. 3 or directly the application
under the URL http://ng.hslayers.org/examples/rostenice/).
Moreover, a user can add a Web map service of his choice
(when respecting WGS84 coordinate system) to make
custom 3D mash-ups. A farmer may check specific locations
like areas with steep slopes, and see how the machinery
deals with them (e.g. checking the machinery tracklogs from
the first visualisation technique).

4. FARM MACHINERY AND 3D VISUALIZATION
A lot of visualisation techniques may be found in the
domain of Precision Agriculture [14]. This paper presents
two specific techniques, a farm machinery visualisation (reusing the data modelling principles described in section 3)
and a 3D interactive visualization of yield productivity zones
(as described in section 2 with data model specifics;
depicted in Figure 3). A newly developed tool called
HSLayers NG (see also https://github.com/hslayers/hslayersng) has been common for both visualisation techniques.
Such tool supports 3D visualization together with methods
to query and visualize RDF (Rich Description Framework)
data.
Monitoring of machinery fleet movement and especially
its spatiotemporal changes brings new insights about the
consequences of human decisions from many areas.
Economic reasons are related to economic evidence for a
farmer, including fuel consumption, efficiency of trajectory
etc. to revenue authority or subsidies management. On the
other hand, ecologic motivations aim to decrease of
environmental burden caused e.g. by high CO2 emissions
due to a lack of movement optimisation, water pollution by
nitrogen due to excessive fertilisation. The main focus of
this visualization technique is therefore given to the
interactivity through utilizing the concept of Multiple
Coordinated Views and dynamic queries to emphasize the

Fig. 3. Perspective view. Perspective visualization of the
yield productivity zones of Rostěnice Farm (Czech
Republic) portrayed on top of the local surface model.

417
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Nebraska - Lincoln. Downloaded on March 20,2023 at 11:56:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[8]
F.J. Pierce, P. Nowak, “Aspects of precision
agriculture,” Advances in Agronomy 1999, 67, pp. 1-85.

5. CONCLUSIONS
The presented data models, their semantic equivalents,
concept of yield productivity zones and visualization
techniques represent the cornerstones for the Big data
technology applications in the domain of Precision Farming
as understood by the consortium of the DataBio project. The
ongoing work focuses on several associated aspects, starting
from validations of yield productivity zones prediction,
through optimising the performance of developed 3D
visualisation application and support of its further
visualisation capabilities to the development of semantic end
user applications.

[9]
R. Bongiovanni, J. Lowenberg-Deboer, “Precision
agriculture and sustainability,” Precision Agriculture 2004, 5, pp.
359-387.
[10]
R. Gebbers, V.I. Adamchuk, “Precision agriculture and
food security,” Science 2010, 327, pp. 828-831.
[11] The Linked Open Data Cloud, created 2007, accessed 2 May
2018, available at: http://lod-cloud.net/.
[12] T. Reznik, K. Charvat jr., K. Charvat, S. Horakova, V. Lukas,
M. Kepka, “Open Data Model for (Precision) Agriculture
Applications and Agricultural Pollution Monitoring,” In
Proceedings of Enviroinfo and ICT for Sustainablity 2015, ACSRAdvances in Computer Science Research, 22, Atlantis Press, Paris,
France, pp. 97-107

Acknowledgments: This project has received funding from
the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme under grant agreement No 732064 entitled
“Data-Driven Bioeconomy” (DataBio), the European
Union’s Seventh Framework Programme for research,
technological development, and demonstration under grant
agreement No. 621074 titled “Farm-Oriented Open Data in
Europe” (FOODIE).

[13] R. Palma, T. Reznik, M.A. Esbri, K. Charvat, C. Mazurek,
“An INSPIRE-Based Vocabulary for the Publication of
Agricultural Linked Data,” Ontology Engineering 2016, 9557, pp.
124-133, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-33245-1_13.

6. REFERENCES

[14]
Jurik, V.; Herman, L.; Sasinka, C.; Stachon, Z.; Chmelik,
J. When the Display Matters: A Multifaceted Perspective on 3D
Geovisualizations. In Open Geosciences 2017, 9 (1), pp. 89-100.
DOI 10.1515/geo-2017-0007.

[1] T. Reznik, V. Lukas, K. Charvat, K. Charvat jr., Z. Krivanek,
M. Kepka, L. Herman, H. Reznikova, “Disaster Risk Reduction in
Agriculture through Geospatial (Big) Data Processing,” ISPRS
International Journal of Geo-Information 2017, 8 (6), Basel,
Switzerland, 11 p., DOI: 10.3390/ijgi6080238.

[15] T. Reznik, K. Charvat, Z. Krivanek, S. Horakova, K. Charvat
jr., M. Kepka, J. Jezek, “The Cartographical Visualization of
Crowdsourcing Data in Precision Agriculture,” In Proceedings of
the International Cartographic Conference 2017, Washington,
United States of America, 7 p.

[2] DataBio [Data-Driven Bioeconomy official project website],
created 2017, accessed 30 April 2018, available at:
https://www.databio.eu/.

[16] J. Jezek, K. Jedlicka, T. Mildorf, J. Kellar, D. Beran, „Design
and Evaluation of WebGL-Based Heat Map Visualization for Big
Point Data,“ Rise of Big Spatial Data - Lecture Notes in
Geoinformation and Cartography 2017, Springer, Cham,
Switzerland, pp. 13 – 26, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-45123-7_2.

[3] FOODIE [Farm Oriented Open Data in Europe official project
website], created 2014, accessed 30 April 2018, available at:
https://www.foodie-project.eu/.

[17]
H. Skokanova, “Can we combine structural functionality
and landscape services assessments in order to estimate the impact
of landscape structure on landscape services?,” Moravian
geographical reports 2013, 21, pp. 2-15, DOI 10.2478/mgr-20130016.

[4] M.E. Bauer, “The role of remote sensing in determining the
distribution and yield of crops,” Advances in agronomy, Brady,
N.C., Ed. Academic Press: 1975; 27, pp 271-304.
[5]
P.C. Doraiswamy, J.L. Hatfield, T.J. Jackson, B.
Akhmedov, J. Prueger, A. Stern, “Crop condition and yield
simulations using landsat and modis,” Remote Sensing of
Environment 2004, 92, pp. 548-559.
[6]
D.B. Lobell, “The use of satellite data for crop yield gap
analysis,” Field Crops Research 2013, 143, pp. 56-64.
[7]
R. Stampach, P. Kubicek, L. Herman, “Dynamic
visualization of sensor measurements: Context based approach,”
Quaestiones Geographicae 2015, 34 (3), pp. 117-128. DOI:
10.1515/quageo-2015-0020.

418
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Nebraska - Lincoln. Downloaded on March 20,2023 at 11:56:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

