IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 57, NO. 7, JULY 2008

1379

Remote Sensing and Control of an Irrigation System
Using a Distributed Wireless Sensor Network
Yunseop (James) Kim, Member, IEEE, Robert G. Evans, and William M. Iversen

Abstract—Efficient water management is a major concern in
many cropping systems in semiarid and arid areas. Distributed
in-field sensor-based irrigation systems offer a potential solution to
support site-specific irrigation management that allows producers
to maximize their productivity while saving water. This paper
describes details of the design and instrumentation of variable rate
irrigation, a wireless sensor network, and software for real-time
in-field sensing and control of a site-specific precision linear-move
irrigation system. Field conditions were site-specifically monitored
by six in-field sensor stations distributed across the field based
on a soil property map, and periodically sampled and wirelessly
transmitted to a base station. An irrigation machine was converted
to be electronically controlled by a programming logic controller
that updates georeferenced location of sprinklers from a differential Global Positioning System (GPS) and wirelessly communicates
with a computer at the base station. Communication signals from
the sensor network and irrigation controller to the base station
were successfully interfaced using low-cost Bluetooth wireless radio communication. Graphic user interface-based software developed in this paper offered stable remote access to field conditions
and real-time control and monitoring of the variable-rate irrigation controller.
Index Terms—Automation, control systems, measurement,
portable radio communication, sensors, water resources.

I. I NTRODUCTION

I

RRIGATION is an essential practice in many agricultural
cropping systems in semiarid and arid areas, and efficient water applications and management are major concerns.
Self-propelled center pivot and linear-move irrigation systems
generally apply water quite uniformly; however, substantial
variations in soil properties and water availability exist across
most fields. In these cases, the ability to apply site-specific irrigation management to match spatially and temporally variable
conditions can increase application efficiencies, reduce environmental impacts, and even improve yields. The development
of a distributed in-field sensor-based site-specific irrigation
system offers the potential to increase yield and quality while
saving water, but the seamless integration of sensor fusion,
irrigation control, data interface, software design, and communication can be challenging.
Several other researchers have investigated the potential use
of feedback from wireless in-field sensing systems to control
Manuscript received March 14, 2007; revised July 11, 2007. This work was
supported in part by the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
The authors are with the U.S. Department of Agriculture-Agricultural
Research Service, Northern Plains Agricultural Research Laboratory, Sidney,
MT 59270 USA (e-mail: jkim@sidney.ars.usda.gov).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2008.917198

variable-rate irrigation systems, but few have fully integrated
these systems. Miranda et al. [1] used a closed-loop irrigation
system and determined irrigation amount based on distributed
soil water measurements. Shock et al. [2] used radio transmission for soil moisture data from data loggers to a central
computer logging site. Wall and King [3] explored designs for
smart soil moisture sensors and sprinkler valve controllers to
implement plug-and-play technology and proposed architectures of distributed sensor networks for site-specific irrigation
automation. Perry et al. [4] compared the uniformity of sprinkler irrigation with and without sprinkler cycling on and off,
and indicated that sprinklers cycling for variable-rate water
applications had no effect on uniformity. Software design for
automated irrigation control has been studied by Abreu and
Pereira [5], who designed and simulated set sprinkler irrigation
systems by using computer-aided design software that allowed
the design of a simplified layout of the irrigation system.
The coordination of control and instrumentation data is
most effectively managed using data networks and low-cost
microcontrollers [3]. Adopting a standard interface for sensors
and actuators allows reuse of common hardware and communication protocol such as communication interface and control
algorithm software. Instrumentation and control standards for
RS-232 serial (voltage based) and RS-485 (current based)
communication protocols have been widely applied and well
documented for integrating sensors and actuators, particularly
in industrial applications.
A hard-wired system from in-field sensing stations to a base
station takes extensive time and costs to install and maintain.
It may not be feasible to hard wire the system for long distances, and it may not be acceptable to growers because it
can interfere with normal farming operations. A wireless data
communication system can provide dynamic mobility and costfree relocation. Radio frequency (RF) technology has been
widely adopted in consumer wireless communication products,
and it provides numerous opportunities to use wireless signal
communication in agricultural systems.
Bluetooth wireless technology is an example that has been
adapted and used for sensing and control of agricultural systems [6]–[8]. Zhang [7] evaluated Bluetooth radio for different
agricultural environments, power consumption, and data transmission rates. Zhang [7] observed 1.4 m as an optimal radio
height for a maximum 44-m radio range and reported limitations of significant signal loss after 8 h of continuous battery
operation and 2–3 s of transmission latency with the increase
of communication range. Oksanen et al. [6] used a personal
digital assistant equipped with Bluetooth to connect a Global
Positioning System (GPS) receiver for their open, generic, and

0018-9456/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Nebraska - Lincoln. Downloaded on March 20,2023 at 01:54:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1380

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 57, NO. 7, JULY 2008

Fig. 1. Conceptual system layout of in-field wireless sensor network for site-specific irrigation.

configurable automation platform for agricultural machinery.
Lee et al. [8] explored an application of Bluetooth wireless data
transmission of the moisture concentration of harvested silage
and reported a limitation of a short 10-m range. However, the
limitations reported by reviewed publications about Bluetooth
applications in agricultural systems can be solved or minimized
by a system design optimization. For example, power shortages
can be solved by using solar panels that recharge the battery,
and the radio range can also be improved by upgrading the
power class and antennas.
The development, testing, and use of an integrated distributed
wireless sensor network (WSN) that utilizes Bluetooth technology are presented in this paper for sensor-based variable
rate irrigation systems. The WSN eliminates the need to hard
wire sensor stations across the field and reduces installation
and maintenance costs. The WSN uses an ad hoc network,
i.e., a mobile wireless network. Compared with a wireless
local area network (WLAN), ad hoc networks have advantages
for agricultural applications, because the mobility and selfconfiguration are more suitable for a distributed sensor network
in fields [7]. The objective of this paper is to report the design,
construction, and testing of a distributed in-field WSN, a remote
sprinkler head valve control, and user-friendly software for realtime in-field sensing and control of a variable rate irrigation
system.
II. M ATERIALS AND M ETHODS
A conceptual system layout of distributed in-field WSN is
illustrated in Fig. 1. The system consists of five in-field sensing
stations distributed across the field, an irrigation control station,
and a base station. The in-field sensing stations monitor the field
conditions of soil moisture, soil temperature, and air tempera-

ture, whereas a nearby weather station monitors micrometeorological information on the field, i.e., air temperature, relative
humidity, precipitation, wind speed, wind direction, and solar
radiation. All in-field sensory data are wirelessly transmitted
to the base station. The base station processes the in-field
sensory data through a user-friendly decision making program
and sends control commands to the irrigation control station.
The irrigation control station updates and sends georeferenced
locations of the machine from a differential GPS mounted at the
cart to the base station for real-time monitoring and control of
the irrigation system. Based on sprinkler head GPS locations,
the base station feeds control signals back to the irrigation
control station to site-specifically operate individual sprinkler
to apply a specified depth of water.
A. Site-Speciﬁc Field Conﬁguration
The spatial variability of agricultural fields has been widely
addressed in precision agriculture [10], [11]; however, optimizing field configurations for site-specific management in each
field remains a difficult task. The spatial variation of the study
site was examined in this paper so that a minimum number of
in-field sensor systems could be placed with optimal impact
for characterizing the scope of the field information. In this
case, the optimal distribution of the in-field sensing stations was
determined on the basis of the spatial soil variability [12].
Soil properties such as a water-holding capacity can have
a major impact on crop yield [13]. Apparent soil electrical
conductivity (ECa ) was used to map the field for its variability,
primarily as an indicator of water-holding capacity as well
as salinity. ECa mapping has been widely used as one way
to characterize variability of agricultural fields [13]–[15]. The
ECa is a measure of the amount of salt in soil, which is directly

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Nebraska - Lincoln. Downloaded on March 20,2023 at 01:54:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM et al.: REMOTE SENSING AND CONTROL OF AN IRRIGATION SYSTEM USING A DISTRIBUTED WSN

related to the water-holding capacity, and other soil properties
such as the percentage of sand, clay, and organic matter.
B. In-Field Sensing Stations
The system components of the in-field sensing stations
and weather station contained three main parts: data logging,
wireless data communication, and power management. A data
logger measured field sensors and was self-powered by a solar
panel (SX5, Solarex, Sacramento, CA) that recharged a sealed
lead acid 12-V battery (NP7-12, Yuasa Battery Inc., Laureldale,
PA) through a voltage regulator (SunSaver-6, Morningstar
Corporation, Washington Crossing, PA). The sensory data were
transmitted via a Bluetooth radio transmitter that is later described in detail.
1) Data Logging: Field data were logged by a data logger
(CR10, Campbell Scientific Inc., Logan, UT) for five in-field
sensing stations and one weather station. A peripheral interface was implemented with a nine-pin D-type connector that
was converted to a serial communication through an optically
isolated RS-232 interface adapter (SC32B, Campbell Scientific
Inc.). All six data loggers used in this paper were programmed
to read data at the same time and configured at 10 s for scanning
and 15 min for the data storage and download.
Two water content reflectometers (CS616, Campbell
Scientific Inc.) were horizontally installed at 30- and 60-cm soil
depth to measure the volumetric water content of soil. Soil temperature is a useful information to determine how temperature
affects the soil water-holding capacity. A temperature probe
(107, Campbell Scientific Inc.) measured soil temperature at
the 30-cm depth and was also used for air-temperature measurement at the 60-cm height with a solar radiation shield. A humidity probe (HMP35C, Vaisala, Helsinki, Finland) was mounted
with a solar radiation shield to measure relative humidity. A
pyranometer (LI200X, Licor, Lincoln, NE) was horizontally
leveled and provided measures of solar radiation as total flux
and flux density.
2) Wireless Data Communication: Most wireless communications follow standard protocols such as the IEEE 802.11,
Bluetooth, or Zigbee, which all use spread spectrum radio
technology. Spectrum bands of 902–928 MHz, 2.4–2.48 GHz,
and 5.7–5.85 GHz have been allocated for license-free spread
spectrum devices [16]. The type of wireless standard in this
paper was determined by the major factors of distance, data
rate, compatibility, and cost. For the application in this paper,
the field was located 700 m from the base station, and the
data transfer rate required less than 1 kB per cycle in both
transmitting and receiving due to a short text string of sensory data. Accommodating existing data loggers and sensors
required plug-and-play compatibility to serial devices with
cost-effective wireless communication modules. Based on all
the requirements for our application, a Bluetooth module was
selected for the wireless data communication from the in-field
sensing stations to a base station.
Bluetooth is an international standard of short-range wireless
communications. The key features of Bluetooth technology
are robustness, low power, and low cost. The Bluetooth radio
transmission uses a slotted protocol with a Frequency Hopping

1381

Spread Spectrum technique in the globally available unlicensed
2.4-GHz Industrial, Scientific, and Medical band. Each device
is identified by a globally unique 48-bit address derived from
the IEEE 802 standard [17]. Bluetooth’s 2.4-GHz hopping frequency system minimizes RF interference from sources such as
a WLAN and maximizes user experience. Communication between Bluetooth devices follows a strict master–slave scheme,
which is known as a piconet, in which the master defines the
timing and the hopping patterns. A master device can simultaneously communicate with up to seven slave devices within a
single piconet, and each device can also simultaneously belong
to several piconets [18].
A Bluetooth RS-232 serial adaptor (SD202, Initium Company, Sungnam, Korea) was used in this paper for wireless data
communication. It was equipped with power class 1 with a
power output of 63 mW (18 dBm) and a range of up to 1200 m
with patch antennas. The adaptor was interfaced with a ninepin D-subfemale connector and an antenna port, and powered
by 5–12 V with current draw of 40 mA at 9600 b/s Bd rate.
3) Power Management: The efficient use of power is critical
for a long-term operational system. Wireless sensor nodes are
mostly powered by batteries and require efficient power management for both data scanning from sensors and for wireless
data communication. Communication protocol is more helpful in reducing power consumption than in hardware optimization [19].
Power consumption was estimated based on two modes:
standby mode that draws power to maintain signal connection
and active mode that draws more power to execute signal
transmission. Based on a data logger that is running at a
scanning interval of 10 s and Bluetooth radio transmission at a
downloading interval of 15 min, daily total power consumption
was 23.8 Wh. The total power supply from a battery and
solar panel was 84 and 20 Wh, respectively. This indicates
that the proposed power system will operate for 3.5 days
if there is no sunlight. In fact, power dissipation was often
observed due to rainy or cloudy days in our experiment during
the first stage. When the Bluetooth device lost power slowly
and the supply voltage dropped below 5 V, the communication link did not re-establish even after the battery was fully
charged by solar radiation. This was caused by a manufacture’s
hardware design limitation. The power system was redesigned
by modifying Bluetooth power management, since the majority of power consumption was used by the Bluetooth standby mode.
C. Irrigation Control Station
1) Plot Design: The wireless variable rate irrigation control
and monitoring was implemented on 3.6-ha experimental plots
that were laid out in 14 strips in the direction of travel. Each
strip was planted with either sugar beet or malting barley, which
alternated from year to year. There are a total of 56 plots with
the individual plot being 15 m wide and 24 m long, including
buffers. Each strip was divided into four plots with two plots
being irrigated with midelevation spray application (MESA)
and two with low energy precision application (LEPA) that are
blocked by replication [9].

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Nebraska - Lincoln. Downloaded on March 20,2023 at 01:54:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1382

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 57, NO. 7, JULY 2008

Fig. 2. Algorithm flowchart of PLC program with variable memory used in bits (V), bytes (VB), words (VW), and double words (VD).

2) Linear-Move Irrigation System: A 295-m-long selfpropelled linear-move irrigation system (Valley, Valmont Irrigation, Valley, NE) was used for in-field sensor-based variable rate
irrigation. It had six towers including the “cart” on one end, on
which an industrial diesel engine was mounted and coupled to
a water supply pump and an electrical generator (480 V, threephase) to provide power for the tower motors and cart motors.
A buried wire alignment system was used with the antennas
located in the middle of the machine. The water supply for the
linear-move machine was a screened floating pump intake in
a level ditch. Nominal operating pressure was about 250 kPa.
Two double direction boom backs were installed at each of the
towers. Spans were 49 m in length except for the center span
with the guidance system that was a 47-m span. The machine
moved at about 2 m/min at the 100% (fastest) setting. A control
panel (Valley CAMS Pro, Valmont Irrigation) was used to turn
the machine on or off, and to control machine ground speed.
This self-propelled linear-move irrigation system has the
capability to apply water using two different irrigation techniques [9]. MESA heads were spaced every 3 m with a spinner
sprinkler (S3000, Nelson Irrigation Corporation, Walla Walla,
WA) with 103-kPa regulators (#31 nozzles). These heads were
about 1 m above the ground on flexible drops with 0.5-kg
weights below each regulator. A different head (Quad-Spray,
Senninger Irrigation, Inc., Clermont, FL) was used for a LEPA
system with 69-kPa regulators (#10 nozzles) and sliding 1-kg
weights above each regulator. The drops were spaced every
1.2 m along submanifolds suspended from the truss rods and
positioned at about 15 cm above the furrow surface. Water was
applied on an alternate-row basis so that each pair of plant rows
has a single LEPA nozzle between them. The LEPA heads were
lifted above the crop when the MESA heads were operating so
as to reduce water distribution interference.

3) Positioning System: The georeferenced location of the
sprinklers was obtained for real-time nozzle control and irrigation monitoring. A wide area augmentation system (WAAS)enabled differential GPS (17HVS, Garmin, Olathe, KS) was
used to determine and track machine position as it moved
across the plots. It was a compact GPS sensor that included an
embedded 12-channel receiver and antenna and utilized WAAS
corrections that yielded 3–5-m position accuracy [20]. However, the relatively slow travel speed of the machine allowed
frequent averaging of GPS readings that increased accuracy to
within 1 m. The GPS was mounted on top of the main cart
and continuously updated georeferential information for the
sprinklers as the irrigation cart moved across the field. The
GPS readings were used to switch water application between
the LEPA and MESA heads and to differentially apply water to
the different crops or plots depending on treatments.
4) Variable Rate Sprinkler Control: The linear irrigation
system used in this paper utilized a basic control and valve
system composed of off-the-shelf components. A programmable logic controller (PLC) (S7-226 with three relay expansion modules, Siemens, Johnson City, TN) activated electric
over air solenoids (U8325B1V, ASCO, Florham Park, NJ) to
control 30 banks of sprinklers. There were 15 banks of sideby-side MESA and LEPA treatments that cover the same areas.
The electric solenoid, in turn, activated a pneumatic system to
close normally open 1.9-cm plastic globe valves (Model 205,
Bermad Inc., Anaheim, CA). In the case of the MESA heads,
the valves were located on the gooseneck above each drop to
each head in groups of five (15-m width). The air-activated
valves were located on three goosenecks that supplied water
to submanifolds for the LEPA heads in each 15-m section.
The controlling electric solenoid valves were grouped into two
clusters of six valves (three MESA and three LEPA) and placed

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Nebraska - Lincoln. Downloaded on March 20,2023 at 01:54:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM et al.: REMOTE SENSING AND CONTROL OF AN IRRIGATION SYSTEM USING A DISTRIBUTED WSN

in a weather-tight plastic enclosure on each cart. Normally open
valves were used on the heads since the failure mode would
leave the sprinklers on and allowed growers to still irrigate if
the system went down.
Air was used as the control fluid, since air is much cleaner
than the irrigation water from surface supplies and prevents foreign material in the water supply from plugging the orifices in
the sprinkler head control valves. A 0.7-kW three-phase 480-V
air compressor was located at the motor/pump cart for easy
maintenance with a 9.5-mm line running the length of machine.
Small 12-L air reservoirs were located at each tower to ensure
rapid and uniform valve operation.
5) Software Design for PLC: The PLC was a micro-PLC
equipped with a microprocessor and two RS-485 communication ports that were used for external communications through
interface cables (RS-232/PPI, Siemens): one for GPS readings and the other for wireless data transmission to the base
computer via the Bluetooth serial adaptor. A PLC software
(STEP 7-Micro/WIN 32 ver. 3.2.2.11, Siemens) was used to
create and download a program into the PLC via an RS-485
communication port. A touch screen interface to the PLC was
also located at the control point.
A PLC program was created to read the GPS current location of the linear irrigation cart, compare it with premeasured
boundary positions of the plots, and send control signals to
solenoids to activate air valves. Fig. 2 illustrates the algorithm
flowchart of the PLC program. Port 0 of the PLC was opened
first to read 50 characters in the $GPGGA NMEA sentence
streaming from the GPS starting from “A” through “M,” as
underlined in the sample data line as follows:

1383

Fig. 3. Base station to communicate with both the sensing station and control
station in the field.

GPGGA, 180302, 4743.6219, N, 10409.0969,
W, 2, 08, 1.1, 579.7, M, , , 1.2, 0000 ∗ 2A.

(1)

The GPS data were sent to the base computer via port 1 of the
PLC, and sprinkler control signals were returned from the base
computer that determined sprinklers on and off based on the
updated GPS locations from the control station. The real-time
control signals from the base computer overrode default values
of sprinkler activation that were preprogrammed in the PLC.
The last subroutine program in Fig. 2 was to assign variable
memory to 30 output channels of the PLC.
D. Base Station
A base station was located about 700 m from the field and
with trees partially blocking the line of sight. A Bluetooth
radio patch antenna was mounted on the east side roof of a
base station building and connected to a receiver (MSP-102a,
Initium Company) beneath the roof via a 1-m extension cable,
as shown in Fig. 3. The receiver was a multiserial Bluetooth
server wired to a base computer via a 15-m crossed RJ45 cable.
The Bluetooth receiver wirelessly received data from all
sensing stations and sent the data to the base computer via
Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)/Internet Protocol (IP)
Ethernet. Nonlegacy serial applications made the use of the
receiver without any modification to the application by using
COM port redirector software (Serial/IP ver 4.3.7, Initium

Fig. 4. Algorithm flowchart of WISC software.

Company) that was a serial emulator to provide virtual COM
ports and to redirect to TCP socket connection. All Bluetooth
devices were paired with the receiver prior to in-field installation. The receiver was configured as a server mode in which the
receiver operated as a TCP server on the network. Six Bluetooth
devices used in this paper were registered into TCP data ports.
1) Software Design for WISC: User-friendly software was
developed for real-time control and monitoring of irrigation
sprinklers based on graphical user interface. The software enabled the user to read the GPS data from the control station
and sensor data from in-field sensing stations and send control
signals to the irrigation control station for individual sprinkler
operation. The wireless in-field sensing and control (WISC)
software was coded by using Microsoft Visual C++.Net
(ver. 7.1) as a console application type of Win32 project.
The algorithm flowchart of the WISC program is shown in
Fig. 4. The program first initialized a system by reading a
configuration file and initializing parameters. A control panel
dialog was handled by a function control subroutine that read
input parameters and checked communication ports. A GPS
mapping dialog followed to display irrigation plots, receive

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Nebraska - Lincoln. Downloaded on March 20,2023 at 01:54:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1384

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 57, NO. 7, JULY 2008

Fig. 5. Site-specific field configuration. (a) Soil profiler for electrical conductivity ECa . (b) In-field wireless sensor network topology based on soil ECa map.

Fig. 6. Amplifier design diagram for a Bluetooth power switch triggered by a program in the data logger through a control port.

GPS readings from the PLC, process the GPS and in-field
sensor data for decision making to individual sprinklers, write
control signals back to the PLC, and update plot display.
III. E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS
A. Site-Speciﬁc Field Conﬁguration
As mentioned earlier, the apparent soil ECa was mapped
by a soil profiler (3100, Veris Technologies, Salina, KS) with
georeferenced points using a differential GPS (Ag132, Trimble,
Sunnyvale, CA) on an experimental field [Fig. 5(a)]. Geostatistical analysis was performed by geographic information
system software (ArcGIS ver. 9.1, ESRI, Redlands, CA) using
a Kriging model to interpolate data and create spatial maps with
five classifications by a quantile method. Fig. 5(b) shows the
soil ECa variation from 38.2 to 128 mS/m with five different
zones where each in-field sensing station was located.
B. Power Management
Power management for the wireless data communication was
redesigned to change the standby mode to a sleep mode, which
can save about 19 Wh/day out of a total of 23.8 Wh/day. To
selectively turn the power on and off, a Bluetooth power cable
was switched to a control port of the data logger. Since a

signal at the control port was a digital transistor–transistor logic
signal with high impedance, the signal had to be amplified to
trigger a transistor. An inverted switch was designed by using
an n-p-n bipolar Darlington transistor (NZT5073) to trigger the
Bluetooth power, as shown in Fig. 6.
A program was modified in data logger software to trigger
control port 3. The control port was triggered to provide Bluetooth power for 2 min. The first minute was a wake-up signal
to stabilize connectivity, whereas the second minute was assigned for data transmission. The radio signal connectivity was
monitored by Bluetooth software (Promi-MSP, ver. 2.5, Initium
Company). The power failure observed without the sleep mode
was illustrated in Fig. 7 and solved by deploying the switch
circuit for the sleep mode, resulting in stable cycle of power
recharge shown at the right side of the dotted line in Fig. 7.
C. Real-Time In-Field Monitoring
An experiment was conducted on a small field at the
Eastern Agricultural Research Center, Montana State University, Sidney, MT, during the winter of 2005. Five in-field
sensing stations were installed based on the soil property map
[Fig. 5(b)] and measured soil moisture and soil temperature.
An in-field weather station was also mounted on the linear
irrigation cart to monitor micrometeorological information: air

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Nebraska - Lincoln. Downloaded on March 20,2023 at 01:54:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM et al.: REMOTE SENSING AND CONTROL OF AN IRRIGATION SYSTEM USING A DISTRIBUTED WSN

Fig. 7.

Power failure without sleep mode (left side of dotted line) and stable power recharging cycle with sleep mode (right side of dotted line).

Fig. 8.

Display of continuous monitoring of in-field sensing stations. The display updates every 15 min.

temperature, relative humidity, precipitation, wind speed, wind
direction, and solar radiation. This stand-alone weather station
could also be located in a nearby field. The location of the
Bluetooth radio antenna was modified from a 50-cm to a
150-cm height to avoid radio signal interference due to crop
canopies during the growing season. All in-field sensory data
were scanned every 10 s, stored, and wirelessly transmitted
to the base station every 15 min. The base station received

1385

the data and displayed field condition using software (RTMC
Development ver. 2.0, Campbell Scientific Inc.). Fig. 8 shows
a graphical data display of real-time monitoring of the in-field
sensing stations.
D. Real-Time Remote Monitoring and Control of Irrigation
The real-time remote monitoring and control of the variable
rate irrigation system was implemented by the WISC software.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Nebraska - Lincoln. Downloaded on March 20,2023 at 01:54:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1386

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 57, NO. 7, JULY 2008

Fig. 9. Display of WISC software for real-time irrigation control and monitoring.

The WISC software displayed two dialog screens: “Control
Panel” and “Real-time GPS-based Irrigation Control and Monitoring”, as shown in Fig. 9. The “Control Panel” screen allowed
local time conversion from GPS’s Greenwich mean time based
on time zone and displayed the status and number for the
communication port to the PLC. It also provided an option to
synchronize the base computer time with the GPS for timesensitive operations and offered automatic data saving based on
either GPS travel distance or time.
The “Real-time GPS-based Irrigation Control and Monitoring” screen was activated from a “GPS Mapping” button
in the “Control Panel” screen. It displayed GPS information
wirelessly transmitted from the PLC and 30 sprinkler outputs
to the PLC in 4 B and binary formats on top lines of the screen.
The software allowed selecting plots to irrigate on menu buttons
above the scaled plot display. The user control of individual
sprinkler nozzle spans was also provided by selecting buttons
on the list of spans after disabling a default mode of “Auto Nozzle Control”. Another default option “Toggle MESA/LEPA”
was added to enable toggling MESA and LEPA when selecting
either one, which prevented redundant irrigation on the same
sites and ensured hydraulic power running through half of the
sprinkler spans. All control selections made in the software
were updated in real time and wirelessly transmitted to the PLC.
Plots were scaled to display with boundary grids based on
crops (sugar beet or barley), and each plot was colorized based
on irrigation sprinkler types (light blue for MESA and light

green for LEPA). The illustration in Fig. 9 is the real-time status
of irrigation when only sugar beet plots were selected, as shown
in menu buttons above the plot display, and thus all barley plots
were whitened to indicate no irrigation. The current location of
the linear irrigation cart was displayed in the red square along
the top edge of the field, and MESA and LEPA plots that are
irrigated were colored in dark blue and dark green, respectively.
There was about a 1-s time lag in the response of the PLC from
the base computer via Bluetooth wireless communication and
an additional maximum 3-s delay in nozzle activation due to
hydraulic power transition. These time delays were ignored,
since the linear cart moved at a maximum of 3 cm/s.
E. Cost of In-Field WSN
There are many choices of WSN that depend on choices of
range, data transmission rate, and cost. We explored how we
could use off-the-shelf devices with a plug-and-play type of
Bluetooth radio module. The total cost of Bluetooth wireless
modules used in this paper for the in-field WSN was approximately $1000.
IV. C ONCLUSION
An automated closed-loop irrigation system requires three
major components: machine conversion, navigation, and mission planning to support the solid communication protocol. This paper developed the machine conversion from a

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Nebraska - Lincoln. Downloaded on March 20,2023 at 01:54:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM et al.: REMOTE SENSING AND CONTROL OF AN IRRIGATION SYSTEM USING A DISTRIBUTED WSN

conventional irrigation system to an electronically controllable system for individual control of irrigation sprinklers and
formulated the navigation of the irrigation system that was
continuously monitored by a differential GPS and wirelessly
transferred data to a base station for site-specific irrigation
control. This paper also provided extensive details for the wireless communication interface of sensors from in-field sensor
stations and for a programmable logic controller from a control
station to the computer at a base station. Bluetooth wireless
technology used in this paper offered a plug-and-play communication module and saved significant time and expense by
using commercially available sensors and controllers equipped
with serial communication ports. Stable wireless signal connectivity was achieved by power management circuit design and
antennas at 1-m above the plant canopies. The development of
WISC software provided real-time remote monitoring and control of variable rate irrigation, and continued decision making
of mission planning for the automated closed-loop irrigation
system. This paper proved a concept of a promising low-cost
wireless solution for an in-field WSN and remote control of
precision irrigation. Potential applications of Bluetooth wireless technology in agricultural systems can be extended to realtime field monitoring, automated irrigation control, and remote
operation of field machinery.
R EFERENCES
[1] F. R. Miranda, R. Yoder, and J. B. Wilkerson, “A site-specific irrigation
control system,” presented at the ASAE Annu. Int. Meeting, Las Vegas,
NV, Jul. 27–30, 2003, Paper No. 031129.
[2] C. C. Shock, R. J. David, C. A. Shock, and C. A. Kimberling, “Innovative,
automatic, low-cost reading of Watermark soil moisture sensors,” in Proc.
Irrig. Assoc. Tech. Conf., Falls Church, VA, 1999, pp. 147–152.
[3] R. W. Wall and B. A. King, “Incorporating plug and play technology into
measurement and control systems for irrigation management,” presented
at the ASAE/CSAE Annu. Int. Meeting, Ottawa, ON, Canada, Aug. 1–4,
2004, Paper No. 042189.
[4] C. D. Perry, M. D. Dukes, and K. A. Harrison, “Effects of variable-rate
sprinkler cycling on irrigation uniformity,” presented at the ASAE/CSAE
Annu. Int. Meeting, Ottawa, ON, Canada, Aug. 1–4, 2004, Paper
No. 041117.
[5] V. M. Abreu and L. S. Pereira, “Sprinkler irrigation systems design using ISADim,” presented at the ASAE Annu. Int. Meeting, Chicago, IL,
Jul. 27–31, 2002, Paper No. 022254.
[6] T. Oksanen, M. Ohman, M. Miettinen, and A. Visala, “Open configurable control system for precision farming,” in Proc. ASAE Int. Conf.
Autom. Technol. Off-Road Equipment, Kyoto, Japan, Aug. 1–4, 2004,
pp. 184–191.
[7] Z. Zhang, “Investigation of wireless sensor networks for precision agriculture,” presented at the ASAE/CSAE Annu. Int. Meeting, Ottawa, ON,
Canada, Aug. 1–4, 2004, Paper No. 041154.
[8] W. S. Lee, T. F. Burks, and J. K. Schueller, “Silage yield monitoring system,” presented at the ASAE Annu. Int. Meeting, Chicago, IL,
Jul. 27–31, 2002, Paper No. 021165.
[9] R. G. Evans and W. M. Iversen, “Combined LEPA and MESA irrigation on a site specific linear move system,” presented at the 26th Annu.
Irrigation Association Int. Irrigation Show, Phoenix, AZ, Nov. 6–8, 2005,
Paper IA05-1298.
[10] A. Irmak, J. W. Jones, W. D. Batchelor, and J. O. Paz, “Linking multiple
layers of information for attribution of causes of spatial yield variability
in soybean,” Trans. ASAE, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 839–849, 2002.
[11] I. S. Ahmad, J. F. Reid, N. Noguchi, and A. C. Hansen, “Nitrogen sensing for precision agriculture using chlorophyll maps,” presented at the
ASAE Annu. Int. Meeting, Toronto, ON, Canada, Jul. 18–22, 1999, Paper
No. 993035.
[12] Y. Kim, R. G. Evans, and J. D. Jabro, “Optimal site-specific configuration
for wireless in-field sensor-based irrigation,” presented at the 26th Annu.
Irrigation Association Int. Irrigation Show, Phoenix, AZ, Nov. 6–8, 2005,
Paper IA05-1307.

1387

[13] H. J. Farahani and G. W. Buchleiter, “Temporal stability of soil electrical
conductivity in irrigated sandy fields in Colorado,” Trans. ASAE, vol. 47,
no. 1, pp. 79–90, 2004.
[14] P. E. Drummond, C. D. Christy, and E. D. Lund, “Using an automated
penetrometer and soil EC probe to characterize the rooting zone,” in Proc.
5th Int. Conf. Precision Agriculture, Bloomington, MN, Jul. 16–19, 2000.
[15] J. D. Jabro, R. G. Evans, Y. Kim, W. B. Stevens, and W. M. Iversen, “Characterization of spatial variability of soil electrical conductivity and cone
index using coulter and penetrometer-type sensors,” Soil Sci., vol. 171,
no. 8, pp. 627–637, 2006.
[16] R. Kulkarni, Technologies for Building Wireless Industrial I/O Systems. Austin, TX: Nat. Instrum., May 3, 2005. [Online]. Available:
http://www.ni.com/swf/presentation/us/wireless
[17] T. Morris, Bluetooth technology living a cable-free lifestyle, May 3, 2005.
[Online]. Available: http://www.ceetusm.com/~dkohn/cet316.html
[18] Bluetooth, Bluetooth Basics, May 5, 2006, Bellevue, WA: Bluetooth
Special Interest Group. [Online]. Available: http://www.bluetooth.com/
Bluetooth/Learn/Basics
[19] G. Pottie, “Wireless sensor networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Inf. Theory
Workshop, Killarney, Ireland, Jun. 22–26, 1998, pp. 139–140.
[20] GPS 16/17 Series Technical Speciﬁcations, Garmin Int., Inc., Olathe, KS,
2002. rev. B.

Yunseop (James) Kim (M’03) received the M.S.
degree in bioresource engineering from Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, in 1999 and the Ph.D.
degree in agricultural engineering from the University of Illinois, Urbana, in 2002. His thesis research
focused on the development of a multispectral imaging sensor for plant nitrogen assessment.
In 2002, he joined Deere & Company, where he
continued working on plant optical sensing for sitespecific crop management. He was also involved
in system integration of autonomous navigation to
develop unmanned ground vehicles. In 2005, he joined the U.S. Department
of Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service, Northern Plains Agricultural
Research Laboratory, Sidney, MT, and began an effort to build a wireless
sensor-based irrigation system using an integrated wireless sensor network for
automated site-specific real-time irrigation scheduling.

Robert G. Evans received the Ph.D. degree from
Colorado State University, Fort Collins, in 1981.
He is an Agricultural Engineer and a Research
Leader with the U.S. Department of AgricultureAgricultural Research Service, Northern Plains Agricultural Research Laboratory, Sidney, MT, where he
is working on irrigated and dryland cropping systems. He was a faculty member at Washington State
University, Pullman, for 20 years before accepting
his current position in 2001. He is an internationally
recognized authority in water management research.
He has made major contributions to the areas of crop-specific water management, plant environmental modifications with irrigation, arid-region irrigation
and nutrient management, and site-specific irrigation.

William M. Iversen received the B.T. degree in electronics and the B.S. degree in vocational-technical
education from Montana State University-Northern,
Havre, in 1975.
In 1976, he received a Northwest College and
University Association for Science Application Engineering Appointment in Richland, WA. From 1976
to 1978, he taught electronics at the University of
South Dakota, Springfield, before electing to farm
full time. He has owned and operated an irrigated and
dryland farm since 1978. From 1992 to 2002, he was
with the U.S. Department of Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service (ARS),
Northern Plains Agricultural Research Laboratory, Sidney, MT, as a Computer
Assistant and a Physical Science Technician, integrating remote sensing, GIS,
and yield monitors in a precision agriculture program. In 2002, he joined the
ARS as a Physical Scientist to assist in the irrigation and sugar beet strip tillage
projects.

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Nebraska - Lincoln. Downloaded on March 20,2023 at 01:54:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

