Theme Article: Envisioning Our Future Digital World

The Future of Digital
Agriculture: Technologies
and Opportunities
Spyros Fountas, Borja Espejo-Garcıa,
Aikaterini Kasimati, Nikolaos Mylonas, and
Nicoleta Darra
Agricultural University of Athens

Abstract—This article presents key technological advances in the digital agriculture,
which will have significant impact. Artificial intelligence-based techniques, together with
big data analytics, address the challenges of agricultural production in terms of
productivity and sustainability. Emerging new applications will transform agriculture from
the traditional farm practices to a highly automated and data intensive industry.

& THE

is transforming agriculture by using modern machinery, computerized tools, and information and communication
technologies (ICTs) to improve decision making
and productivity. The spread of several cuttingedge technologies, from GPS and remote sensing
to big data, artificial intelligence and machine
learning, robotics, and the Internet of Things
(IoT), to agriculture is leading to increased
yields, lower costs, and reduced environmental
impact. Data-driven solutions are unlocking production potential in a sustainable and resourceefficient way.
DIGITAL REVOLUTION

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/MITP.2019.2963412
Date of current version 12 February 2020.

24

1520-9202 ß 2020 IEEE

Precision agriculture management systems are
allowing growers to benefit from this new tsunami
of data they can gather. These systems collect,
classify, and analyze vast amounts of data to
detect patterns and solutions. They enable farmers to observe, comprehend, and manage the variability in their production systems by tailoring
inputs to get desired outputs. GPS-controlled tractors can work around the clock, ploughing, planting, and harvesting while gathering continuous
“on-the-go” georeferenced data. These self-driving
vehicles can perform precise operations, with the
help of GPS, Geographical Information Systems
(GIS), and Variable-Rate Technology (VRT).
Weather stations supply a variety of agriculture-specific weather data. Such weather data

Published by the IEEE Computer Society

IT Professional

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Nebraska - Lincoln. Downloaded on March 20,2023 at 11:58:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

are fed into the big data pool and promote farming decisions, such as irrigation decision making
based on plant-water demand and accurate forecast of harvest dates. Remote and proximal sensing is used to capture invaluable soil and crop
related data through hyperspectral, multispectral, and thermal sensors or cameras. Unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAV) for agricultural purposes
have the potential to be used from analysis
applications, by producing soil and field threedimensional models, data acquisition, and crop
growth monitoring, to spraying or planting applications.1 They are delivering regularly updated
high-quality data to provide insight into crop
development and highlight ineffective practices
to track changes in health and maturity and to
identify parts of a field experiencing “hydric
stress.” UAVs have also proven well suited for
crop spraying, as they can apply fertiliser, herbicide, and pesticide liquids faster, more accurately, and with higher efficiency. Finally, UAVplanting systems are under development by
using compressed air to fire seedpods directly
into the ground.
The digitalization enables farmers to control
their farms remotely and manage agricultural
activities in a more effective way. In the near
future, IoT will allow for automatic real-time
interaction, controlling, and decision-making as
agriculture sensors, actuators, and devices, as
aforementioned, will all be interconnected. This
will minimize human effort while saving time and
increasing both yield and profit.2 The emergence
of cloud-based farm management platforms,
such as the SmartFarm and Agrivi, aims to integrate these data coming multiple sources and
include decision support systems. All these give
growers insights for dynamic management planning, which have traditionally only been available to corporate megafarms. A general
overview of the digital agriculture can be seen in
Figure 1.

REMOTE SENSING
A variety of remote sensing technologies, from
proximal sensors (within 1 m distance from the
monitoring object), to drones, to satellites are
used by the agricultural sector, providing insight
to tackle the uncertainties coming from the

January/February 2020

variations of weather conditions and management
strategies. These sensors exploit vegetation’s
reflectance properties and provide the opportunity to assess biomass, yield, acreage, vegetation
vigor, drought stress, and phenological development, enabling early and efficient decision making
in fertilization, irrigation, and pest management.
Currently, the commercial availability of very
high-resolution satellite data that varies in technique (active/passive, radiometer/scatterometer), spatial resolution (from submeter to
kilometers), spectral range, and viewing geometry
has opened up a number of new perspectives on
the use of earth observation products in agricultural monitoring,3 both at large and small scale
areas. Similar information can also be retrieved by
UAV remote sensing systems, which are often
operated at very low altitude. Such systems use
multispectral, hyperspectral, and thermal cameras that can measure heat, radiation, or light to
capture a diverse electromagnetic spectrum.
Although data retrieval in this case is less dependent on weather conditions, simplifying or even
omitting atmospheric correction, these images
cover much less area compared to the satellite
products.
Technological advancements, such as analytical platforms, multispectral and hyperspectral
sensors, as well as satellite data hubs that provide free and open access to satellite products [
e.g., Copernicus Open Access Hub (ESA), EarthExplorer (United States Geological Survey),
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (United States Department of Commerce)],
can act as the stepping stone for building reliable agronomic models on the basis of existing
data generated by innovative monitoring applications. Furthermore, the development of agricultural infrastructure networks that allow faster
and complete mining of the agricultural information through satellite data in deeper and broader
horizons is necessary to improve the quality and
efficiency of agricultural monitoring. This can
also accelerate the delivery of agricultural data
platforms, which could provide timely comprehensive information, to guide agronomic and
economic decision making. However, the limited
access of the farmers to the ground truth information becomes an obstacle to evaluate the
crop status under various environmental

25

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Nebraska - Lincoln. Downloaded on March 20,2023 at 11:58:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Envisioning Our Future Digital World

Figure 1. View of a digital agricultural field that has IoT devices to sense soil moisture, robotic vehicles
(ground and aerial), and antennas to receive satellite images. Copyright: Authors; published with permission.

conditions. Therefore, efforts to establish networks of validation sites with the support of
space agencies and/or environmental institutions are required.
Some of the challenges in agricultural remote
sensing are related to standartalization of the
data coming from different types of sources and
different georeferenced systems, which cause
problems on image projection and mapping. A
space, aerial, and ground integrated structure to
manage multiple sources of the remotely sensed
crop parameters for agricultural data acquisition
can also be the key to accurate visualization and
monitoring of the crop status from multiple perspectives. The heterogeneity of satellite products
in terms of spatial, spectral, temporal, and radiometric characteristics can also cause accuracy
problems and be highly inadequate with the
wrong approach. Finally, advanced remote sensing technologies generate a massive amount data
of high volume and complexity, increasing the
challenges of data storage and computation
power, leading to serious issues in data management. For potential users, the wide variety of
products can be confusing, and the analysis
of the derived data is sometimes still too
complicated.

26

ROBOTIC SYSTEMS TO AUTOMATE
MONOTONOUS FARM OPERATIONS
Robotic systems have found fertile ground in
agriculture tasks, due to the progress of ICT technologies, mainly advanced sensing, actuation,
and AI. The increasing demand for accurate field
operations, while reducing the farming inputs
and environmental impact, constitute robotic
platforms as the alternative of conventional tractors and implements. Small sized, electrically
driven platforms are employed for a wide range
of tasks, such as light ploughing, spraying, fertilizing, and harvesting. Especially in greenhouse production, due to the controlled environment
conditions and structured cultivation properties,
there are already commercial solutions offering
significant advantages mainly for fruit harvesting.
Finally, robotics have found several applications
in livestock production, with more prominent evidence such as autonomous milking robots,
manure scraping, and feeding platforms, combined with individualized care and health monitoring using identification technologies like RFID.
Considering the technological edge that these
platforms can offer to agriculture, there are important challenges that prevent robotics from reaching their full potential. The existing prototypes

IT Professional

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Nebraska - Lincoln. Downloaded on March 20,2023 at 11:58:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

and commercial platforms are limited to task-specific operations, whereas the scalability to different crops or environments is questioned.
Furthermore, there are many interoperability and
standardization problems when it comes to agrorobotics, with the communication of platforms
and safety issues posing considerable barriers.
Expanding the capabilities of robots from the lab
and greenhouse environment to the outdoor conditions is crucial, when it comes to sensing under
harsh environments and operating under unpredicting conditions. Regardless of the technical
barriers, there is considerable skepticism related
to social, economical, and ethical challenges in
agricultural robotics. Labor shift from repetitive
tasks to high-skilled engineering jobs and the
imbalanced adoption of agritechnologies by farmers is expected to create social implications.
Advanced intelligence and decision-making capabilities of robots results in debates about moral
aspects and, overall, who has the responsibility
for these actions. Moreover, expensive technologies and the demand for resources and infrastructures to launch robotics in the field will challenge
the effective adoption of robotics from the feasibility point of view.
Moving toward the era of intelligence systems,
robotic platforms will be the cornerstone of agriculture operations. UAV platforms will manage
several light weight tasks, such as spraying and
health inspections, as well as supervising ground
robot fleets operating in the field. In the future,
robots will be able to collaborate with humans
without compromising safety in tasks like harvesting. To this end, robot cognition is expected to
reach supremacy levels, with the systems able to
have full environment awareness and clear reasoning of the decisions taken, for example, how to
treat rotten fruit during harvesting or interrupt
spraying when humans are in close range.

AI IN DIGITAL AGRICULTURE
AI applications in agriculture are increasing.
Deep learning constitutes the state-of-the-art
method for image and language processing with
promising results for addressing farming problems, such as weed detection, plant disease diagnosis, crop type classification, and pesticide
recommendations. Techniques stemming from

January/February 2020

deep learning, such as transfer learning or capsule networks, will lead future decision making
by taking into account several factors, such as
environmental conditions, harvesting practices,
financial needs, soil characteristics, or water
availability.
Deep learning methods, specifically convolutional nets (CNNs), are gaining fast growth for
the automation of crop classification and disease/weed identification. The main reason is
that contrary to the conventional machine-learning techniques, CNN training allows automatic
learning representations of data with multiple
levels of abstraction. Although CNNs are very
data demanding, a technique called transfer
learning is used to overcome this requirement
by reusing patterns learned by state-of-the-art
CNNs in the related tasks. Additionally, CNNs
have also shown promising results with other
problems, such as yield prediction, by extracting
patterns from satellite imagery.
In the future, other techniques are expected to
emerge solve open problems in agriculture.
Regarding to computer vision related problems,
such as crop classification and disease/weed
identification, new architectures, such as capsule
networks, will address current CNN limitations.4
Contrary to CNNs, capsules (grouped neurons)
consider the spatial relationships between entities and learn these relationships via dynamic
routing, utilizing a nonlinear function called
squashing. In regard to the use of reinforcement
learning instead of the supervised one, architectures, such as imagination-augmented agents, will
also play an important role, extending intelligence
through imagination by learning to interpret predictions from a learned environment model.5
On the other hand, the extraction of information from natural language documents containing policies and regulations could be addressed
by a recurrent neural network (RNN). Specifically, a subtype of RNNs called long short-term
memories have arisen in the past years as good
at modeling varying length sequential data,
achieving state-of-the-art results for many problems in natural language processing (NLP), such
as machine translation, information extraction,
and text classification. Similar to computer
vision, the use of transfer learning by word
embedding techniques based on ELMO and

27

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Nebraska - Lincoln. Downloaded on March 20,2023 at 11:58:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Envisioning Our Future Digital World

BERT will help to avoid the expensive creation of
the necessary language model for more
advanced NLP tasks. Such systems have been
used to extract expert knowledge for regulations
on pesticide use or agricultural knowledge from
existing research databases.
Finally, another technique will be relevant in
the near future: generative adversarial networks
(GANs). This type of network could address the
problem of data scarcity within agricultural computer vision when transfer learning and traditional data augmentation are not enough. The
main advantage of GANs is that they can create
pictures with synthetic “real” crops instead of
just rotating or adding noise to the existing
ones. This synthetic data could be used to
improve the generalization ability of a CNN that
obtains poor results due to the constraints in
the size of the original dataset and the limitations of the traditional techniques.

CONCLUSION
Digital agriculture is developing rapidly,
driven by many technological advances in the
area of remote sensing, artificial intelligence, and
robotic systems. These systems enable farmers
to produce comprehensive, accurate, and transparent crop and livestock products, both at the
national and regional levels and to get increased
yield and quality, minimizing the environmental
impact. However, several challenges and limitations, such as accuracy, interoperability, data
storage, computation power, and farmers reluctance to adoption, need to be addressed for effective use of these technologies and widespread
digital transformation of agriculture.

& REFERENCES
1. J. Miranda, P. Ponce, A. Molina, and P. Wright,
“Sensing, smart and sustainable technologies for AgriFood 4.0,” Comput. Industry, vol. 108, pp. 21–36, 2019.
2. A. Khanna and S. Kaur, “Evolution of Internet of Things
(IoT) and its significant impact in the field of Precision
Agriculture,” Comput. Electron. Agriculture, vol. 157,
pp. 218–231, 2019.
3. S. R. Oza, S. Panigrahy, and J. S. Parihar, “Concurrent
use of active and passive microwave remotesensing

4. S. Sabour, N. Frosst, and G. E. Hinton, “Dynamic
routing between capsules,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf.
Neural Inf. Process., 2017, pp. 3859–3869.
re et al., “Imagination-augmented agents
5. S. Racanie
for deep reinforcement learning,” Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2017. arXiv:1707.06203.

Spyros Fountas is an associate professor with
the Agricultural University of Athens, Greece. He
received the M.Sc. degree in information technology
from Cranfield University, Cranfield, U.K. and the
Ph.D. degree in precision agriculture from Copenhagen University, Copenhagen, Denmark. He is the
Editor-in-Chief for Computers and Electronics in
Agriculture (Elsevier), since 2014. He is the
corresponding author of this article. Contact him at
sfountas@aua.gr.
Borja Espejo-Garcia is a postdoc researcher with
the Agricultural University of Athens, Greece. From
2015 to 2019, he worked toward the Ph.D. degree in
artificial intelligence with the University of Zaragoza,
Spain, and the M.Sc. degree in computer science
with a postgraduate course in systems engineering.
Contact him at borjaeg@aua.gr.
Aikaterini Kasimati is an agricultural engineer with
experience in precision agriculture, bioenvironmental
engineering, and energy production. She received the
M.Sc. degree in agricultural and biological engineering from the University of Illinois, Champaign, IL, USA.
She is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree with
the Agricultural University of Athens, Greece, in the
field of precision agriculture and big data analytics.
Contact her at akasimati@aua.gr.
Nikos Mylonas is a mechanical engineer and
received the M.Sc. degree in biosystems engineering,
Wageningen University and Research, Wageningen,
the Netherlands, focusing on computer vision in agriculture. His main research interests include the field of
AI and robotic applications in horticulture. Contact
him at nmylonas@aua.gr
Nicoleta Darra is an agricultural biotechnologist
with the Agricultural University of Athens, Greece,
from where she received the M.Sc. degree in bioinformatics. For three years, she has been involved in
research on precision agriculture with emphasis
on remote sensing applications. Contact her at
nicoletadarra@aua.gr.

data for monitoring of rice crop,” Int. J. Appl. Earth
Obst. Geoinform., vol. 10, pp. 296–304, 2008.

28

IT Professional

Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Nebraska - Lincoln. Downloaded on March 20,2023 at 11:58:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

