Agricultural Systems 76 (2003) 141–157
www.elsevier.com/locate/agsy

Typiﬁcation of farming systems for constructing
representative farm models: two illustrations of
the application of multi-variate analyses in Chile
and Pakistan
C. Köbricha, T. Rehmanb,*, M. Khanc
a
Department of Animal Production, University of Chile, Casilla 2 Correo 15, La Granja, Santiago, Chile
Department of Agriculture, The University of Reading, PO Box 237, Earley Gate, Reading RG6 6AR, UK
c
Agricultural Economics Research Unit, National Agricultural Research Council, Park Road,
Islamabad, Pakistan

b

Accepted 1 March 2002

Abstract
If the fundamental precepts of Farming Systems Research were to be taken literally then it
would imply that for each farm ‘unique’ solutions should be sought. This is an unrealistic
expectation, but it has led to the idea of a recommendation domain, implying creating a taxonomy of farms, in order to increase the general applicability of recommendations. Mathematical programming models are an established means of generating recommended solutions,
but for such models to be eﬀective they have to be constructed for ‘truly’ typical or representative situations. The multi-variate statistical techniques provide a means of creating the
required typologies, particularly when an exhaustive database is available. This paper illustrates the application of this methodology in two diﬀerent studies that shared the common
purpose of identifying types of farming systems in their respective study areas. The issues
related with the use of factor and cluster analyses for farm typiﬁcation prior to building
representative mathematical programming models for Chile and Pakistan are highlighted.
# 2003 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Farm types; Multi-variate analysis; Farming systems research; Mathematical programming

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +44-118-931-8480; fax: +44-118-931-6747.
E-mail address: t.u.rehman@reading.ac.uk (T. Rehman).
0308-521X/03/$ - see front matter # 2003 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
PII: S0308-521X(02)00013-6

142

C. Köbrich et al. / Agricultural Systems 76 (2003) 141–157

1. Introduction
In the ‘systems approach’ to agricultural research and extension, a farming system
is seen as comprising the totality of production and consumption decisions taken by
a farm-household, including the choice of crop, livestock and oﬀ-farm enterprises,
and food consumed by the household (Byerlee et al., 1980). Nevertheless, no farmhousehold has the same resources or problems. This implies that every farming system is diﬀerent, if not unique, facing distinctive decision-making problems, whose
solutions could also be unique. Unfortunately it is not feasible in practice, making it
necessary to classify or group farms in some way. Such groups constitute the socalled recommendation domains, ‘‘a group of roughly homogenous farmers with
similar circumstances for whom we can make more or less the same recommendation’’ (Byerlee et al., 1980). Clearly, the ‘best’ typology of farms will have to show a
maximum amount of heterogeneity between the types, while obtaining maximum
homogeneity within particular types or categories, for it to be truly representative of
the categories represented. But, the methodologies such as ‘sondeo’ and ‘rapid rural
appraisal’ used to deﬁne domains, which are simple and straightforward, have tended
to equate the recommendation domain with a geographic area, when in fact geographic areas exhibit great diversity (Escobar and Berdegué, 1990). The failure to
recognise and deal with the heterogeneity of farming systems within a geographic
area is one of the main criticisms of Farming Systems Research and Extension.
The ordering of farms, mainly from a geographic point of view, into distinct types
has been practised since the beginning of this century. For example, the Commission
on Agricultural Typology was established with the task of determining common
principles, criteria, methods and techniques for agricultural typiﬁcation, and to
specify the typological and regional classiﬁcation of world agriculture (Kostrowicki,
1977). This Commission also recognised the importance of typiﬁcation based on
quantitative methods, as qualitative typiﬁcation based on expert opinion could show
diﬀerent results with time. It was recommended that the typiﬁcation variables
should be limited in number and that they should be synthetic or composite in nature (Kostrowicki, 1977).
Agricultural systems have been classiﬁed mostly according to qualitative criteria
using subjective assessments based on arbitrary and ad hoc considerations. These
classiﬁcations also tend to be descriptive rather than explanatory or predictive; two
such examples are Spedding’s (1988) general classiﬁcation of agricultural systems
and the classiﬁcation of goat production systems in Peru which is based on environmental, socio-political and economic factors (Perevolotsky, 1990).
The objective methods of classiﬁcation can provide an exhaustive array of types,
allowing condensing of large data sets, and thus helping a researcher to identify
those types that are needed for analysis. However, the literature on farming systems
research cites only a limited published research on the applications of quantitative
typiﬁcation methods or, indeed, the discussion on the theoretical aspects of typiﬁcation of farming systems. The examples that can be found include a socioeconomic classiﬁcation of German farm households (Gebauer, 1987), and a cluster
analysis of farming systems in Central North China (Hardiman, 1990). However,

C. Köbrich et al. / Agricultural Systems 76 (2003) 141–157

143

for Latin-America, the situation is rather better as a set of typiﬁcation exercises
showing a variety of methodological variations have been presented in Escobar and
Berdegué (1990). They include the contributions by Berdegué et al. (1990) in Chile,
by Landı́n (1990) in Ecuador, by Duarte (1990) in Colombia, by Martı́nez et al.
(1990) in Guatemala, and by Douglas (1990) in the western Caribbean.
Recently two studies have been carried out at The University of Reading that
faced the common problem of creating typical representations of farming systems in
two diﬀerent countries, Chile and Pakistan. In both situations classiﬁcation schemes
were applied to data in order to develop mathematical programming decisionmaking models for typical farming systems. The purpose of this paper is to present
the most important aspects related to the use of multi-variate statistical analysis in the
typiﬁcation of farming systems. The problems encountered in the typiﬁcation of
farming systems are highlighted and the implications for the construction of representative farm models are drawn. The paper begins by detailing the methodology
followed by a discussion of results from the two applications before oﬀering some
concluding observations on the importance of deﬁning what a ‘‘representative farm’’ is.

2. Methodology
A continuum of six stages of the procedure to establish the farming system (FS)
types can be identiﬁed (Escobar and Berdegué, 1990): (1) determination of the speciﬁc theoretical framework for typiﬁcation, (2) selection of variables, (3) collection
of data, (4) factor analysis, (5) cluster analyses, and (6) validation. The theoretical
framework deﬁnes the purpose of classiﬁcation and establishes the hypothesis (es) to
guide the process of typiﬁcation. The inputs required at the beginning are
the researchers’ previous experience and knowledge of the area, the objectives of the
typiﬁcation exercise and, the quantitative information that is available about
the study area’s agriculture (Escobar and Berdegué, 1990). The translation of the
hypotheses into a set of variables that can be used in the typiﬁcation scheme is
the most critical step, but it is also the least understood. It is necessary to assess the
relevance of the variables to the problem being investigated (Aldenderfer and
Blashﬁeld, 1984). Although there cannot be a general rule for the selection of variables, the most commonly used ones include farm size, capital, labour, production
pattern, soil quality, and managerial ability (Escobar and Berdegué, 1990). Further
the identiﬁcation of types ought to be based on internal and not on external attributes. The use of both types of attributes would presuppose rather than show their
impact on the identiﬁcation of farming systems (Kostrowicki, 1977).
The information collected on the various variables can be processed prior to factor analysis and those variables, which do not show variability, can be discarded.
First, any variable that makes little contribution, in terms of its variability, to the
measure of distance being used to form clusters can be discarded (Escobar and
Berdegué, 1990). Second, some variables may not be relevant to the typiﬁcation
required for the purposes of a particular study and can therefore be discarded, even
though the typology obtained initially is consistent with observable farming systems

144

C. Köbrich et al. / Agricultural Systems 76 (2003) 141–157

(Berdegué et al., 1990). Thus a researcher has to assess if the information imparted
by a variable is consistent with research objectives. Third, highly correlated variables
can be eliminated as an uncritical use of such variables to compute a measure of
similarity is essentially an implicit weighting of these variables (Aldenderfer and
Blashﬁeld, 1984). For a given variable that is highly correlated to another one, its
contribution to the measure of distance is reﬂected by changes in other variables.
Finally, cluster analysis requires that if data are missing the complete observation be
discarded or else average values be used. The ﬁrst option reduces the number of
farms, while the second may bias the results. So if possible, the variables should be
discarded instead of the observations.
The purpose of the fourth stage (factor analysis) is to reduce the number of variables and thus the ‘dimensionality’ of the problem. Factor analysis is often used
when the variables used in the study are known to be correlated (Aldenderfer and
Blashﬁeld, 1984). It is concerned with the internal relationships of a set of variables
and is aimed at constructing a set of factors (hypothetical unobserved variables)
from a set of observable variables (Lawley and Maxwell, 1971). In other words,
observed values (Y) are explained through a linear combination of factors (B) and a
residual (E) or Y ¼ XB þ E. The factors are common when they contribute to the
variance for at least two observed variables or unique when their contribution is only
towards one variable. A correlation matrix for a set of observations (R-factor analysis) is prepared or, less frequently, for individuals for a set of variables (Q-factor
analysis). Then the initial factors are extracted which can be based on deﬁned factors, principal component analysis (PCA), or on inferred factors, that is common
factor analysis (FA). As the exact conﬁguration of the factor structure is not unique,
one factor solution can be transformed into another one or rotated to a terminal
solution. This can achieve simpler and more meaningful factor patterns, instead of
the highly complex extracted factors that are related to many of the variables rather
than to just a few (Kim, 1970; Comrey and Lee, 1992).
The main diﬀerence between PCA and Common FA is how the communalities are
computed, that is the fraction of each variable’s variance that is explained by the
total of the extracted factors. Communality represents the extent of overlap between
the extracted factors and the variable and it equals the sum of squares of the variable’s loadings across factors (Comrey and Lee, 1992). As PCA is based on statistical variance, the ﬁrst chosen factor accounts for most of the variance in the data.
The second is chosen in the same way but it has to be orthogonal to the ﬁrst. The
last factor explains all the residual variance (Kim, 1970; Lawley and Maxwell, 1971).
The common FA is a covariance or correlation oriented method based on the
assumption that each variable is inﬂuenced by a set of shared or common factors
that determine the correlation between variables. The implied expectation is that the
number of common factors will account for all the observed relations and that such
factor will be less than the number of variables (Lawley and Maxwell, 1971). In
common factor analyses the correlation matrix is transformed before undertaking
factor analysis (Kim, 1970).
Determining how many factors should be retained is a problem, as with real data
the actual number that merit retention is often considerably smaller than the number

C. Köbrich et al. / Agricultural Systems 76 (2003) 141–157

145

of variables. One test searches for a point where there is a break in the Eigenvalues,
that is, the variation in the original group of variables, which is accounted for by a
particular factor. As factors are extracted from large to small, their Eigenvalues are
also decreasing. When they are plotted, a straight line can be drawn through the
latter smaller values. The earlier, larger values will fall above the straight line. It is
proposed that the number of factors to be retained is at the point where the last
small factor is above the line, giving an indication of how many factors there are
(Comrey and Lee, 1992). Another test deﬁnes a threshold level for the residual
correlation, beyond which it would be unnecessary to continue extracting, as any
new factor would have very small loadings (Comrey and Lee, 1992). A common rule
is to extract all the factors with Eigenvalues of 1.0 or more (Kaiser’s rule). Whatever
rule is used, it must be kept in mind that it is better to err on the side of extracting
too many factors rather than too few, as the idea is to extract enough factors to be
relatively certain that no more factors of any importance were discarded (Comrey
and Lee, 1992).
Next, cluster analysis is used to classify the observations according to m-variables
of an n-dimensional attribute space, by computing the similarity between any pair of
observations though a distance coeﬃcient (Sokal, 1977). The agglomerative hierarchical clustering models form an initial partition of N clusters (each object is one
cluster) and they proceed, in a stepwise manner, to reduce the number of clusters
one at a time until all N objects are one cluster. All models can be characterised by a
set of N partitions and their corresponding criterion values ‘’. The hierarchical
methods diﬀer on how ‘’ is deﬁned (Mojena, 1977). Once the cluster sequence has
been established where the process will be cut and thus how many clusters will be
deﬁned can be determined. The heuristic procedures and formal tests are two basic
means for determining the number of clusters (Aldenderfer and Blashﬁeld, 1984). Of
the two methods the heuristic procedures are used most commonly. The hierarchical
tree (dendrogram) can be ‘cut’ through subjective inspection or, more formally, by
plotting the number of clusters against the change in the fusion coeﬃcient (i.e. the
diﬀerence between the distance coeﬃcient at one clustering stage and the previous
one). A ﬂat or even curve suggests that no new information is portrayed by the
mergers that follow. Further, when two dissimilar clusters are merged, the slope of
the distance coeﬃcient curve gets steeper and ‘jumps’ can be seen. However, the
problem of determining when a ‘signiﬁcant jump’ occurs remains (Aldenderfer and
Blashﬁeld, 1984).
As a means of solving this problem, ‘stopping rules’ have been deﬁned to determine which partition best approximates the underlying populations (Mojena, 1977;
Milligan and Cooper, 1985). These rules can be based on the distribution of the
criterion ‘’. A signiﬁcant change in ‘’ from one stage to the next implies a partition
which should not be accepted. One stopping rule is based on the mean and standard
deviation of the N1 items in the distribution of ‘’ (Mojena, 1977). This means that
an optimal partition of a hierarchical clustering solution is selected when jþ1 >
 þ ks is satisﬁed; where j+1 is the value of the criterion on the stage j+1 of the
clustering process, k is the standard deviate, and  and sa are, respectively, the mean
and unbiased standard deviation of the -distribution. This rule essentially parallels

146

C. Köbrich et al. / Agricultural Systems 76 (2003) 141–157

a one-tail conﬁdence interval based on the fusion values. If no such value satisﬁes
the inequality, the solution is one of the three possibilities: (1) one cluster, (2) the
stage j for which j+1 yields the largest standard deviate, or (3) some other heuristic
rule is required (Mojena, 1977). The problem with this approach is the value of the
standard deviate. When tested with artiﬁcial data sets (‘natural clusters’), the best ﬁt
between the natural clusters and the clusters established by the stopping rule were
found when using values in the range of 1.25–3.00 (Mojena, 1977; Milligan and
Cooper, 1985). Such a diverse range for k has a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the partition
selection.
Once all clusters have been established, each representing one of the real farming
systems, they still need to be validated. It is important to ensure that these groups
are ‘real’ and not merely imposed on the data by the method being used for classifying (Aldenderfer and Blashﬁeld, 1984). The problem is how to carry out signiﬁcance, or ‘optimality’ tests, to validate the classiﬁcation (Sokal, 1977) as no
formal procedure has been developed for this purpose. A good alternative thus is to
contrast the FS types with the hypotheses about its structure, as well as with the
researcher’s perception with regard to the variety of FSs that have been observed
empirically (Escobar and Berdegué, 1990). Finally, it must be mentioned that for
classes or categories to be meaningful, and useful, they have to be related to the
purposes for which they are being created; therefore, the fact that they serve
the purposes for which they are intended, provides the most meaningful way of
testing their conceptual validity.

3. The Chilean application
This project was concerned with the analysis of the impact of the development
policies on peasant farming systems in a micro-region of Chile’s coastal mountains
(Köbrich, 1997). The hypothesis being tested was that the impact of these policies
would depend on the levels of available resources such as labour, land (including
the pattern of its use) and capital. Despite the predominant prevalence of wheat–
livestock production pattern, great variability in the availability of labour, land and
herd size was observed and therefore it was necessary to obtain a typiﬁcation of
farming conditions. The data set for 67 farmers included information on location,
productive orientation, household structure, on-farm and oﬀ-farm labour use,
available land, land use capability, actual land use, and livestock numbers.
The criteria of missing data, variation, relevance, and the presence of correlation
were used to determine if a particular variable would be used in typiﬁcation. First,
the three variables related with land use capability (arable, non-arable, and nonagricultural land) as well as the variable, irrigated land, were discarded due to
missing data. It was thought that the impact of the elimination of these four variables on the generation of clusters would be small, as irrigated land was scarce and
land quality was related to land use. In fact ‘‘arable land’’ and ‘‘non-arable land’’
were highly correlated to other variables. Next, the variables ‘‘number of poultry’’,
‘‘number of pigs’’ and ‘‘number of sows’’ were discarded because no farm possessed

C. Köbrich et al. / Agricultural Systems 76 (2003) 141–157

147

them in large numbers, nor were they important from the point of view of the
research. Similarly, the county in which the farm was located had no relevance,
because the unit of analysis in this study was deﬁned as the micro-region, and there
was no reason to justify a typology based on location of farms. If the diﬀerences
between counties do exist, they should become evident after farm typiﬁcation. Further, to include the qualitative variable ‘county’ would require its replacement by a
set of variables per county (one less than the number of categories) with values 0 or
1 deﬁning the location of the farm. The third criterion, variability, was evaluated
through the coeﬃcient of variation. It was established on an a priori basis that the
variables with a coeﬃcient of variation of less than 50% would not be considered.
The variables, ‘‘manager’s age’’ and ‘‘time spent by the manager on farm’’ did not
match these criteria. The correlation coeﬃcients between the remaining variables
were also computed to determine which other variables could be discarded. The two
variables ‘‘land given out’’ and ‘‘area of vineyards and orchards’’ were not correlated to any other variable and were thus included.
Second, three pairs of highly correlated variables (R250.90) were found and
one variable from each pair was then discarded. The criteria that determined which
variable to keep from each pair were a variable’s relevance, the quality of the data
obtained from the farm, and the availability of the data on a particular variable.
From the pair ‘‘total available land’’ and ‘‘natural pastures’’, the second one was
discarded because it is more susceptible to year-by-year change than the total area of
available land. Other correlated variables were the two pairs of variables relating the
number of livestock to the number of females (i.e. cattle and sheep and goats). The
variables ‘‘number of cows’’ and ‘‘total number of ewes and does’’ were kept as data
on female livestock has a steadier level and to a great extent determines the total
number of livestock. Next, the variables with low correlation coeﬃcients were
included in the ﬁnal data set. These variables were ‘‘number of months women
spend working on-farm’’, ‘‘area under artiﬁcial pastures’’, and ‘‘agricultural land
used for other crops’’. The 10 remaining variables were analysed one by one. The
variable ‘‘time spent by other male members working on-farm’’ was included
because up to this stage only two variables to which it was correlated were in the
data set. The ‘‘area of owned land’’ was excluded because of its high correlation with
‘‘total available land’’ and because it was correlated to three variables already in the
data set. The variables ‘‘area of land taken-in for sharecropping’’ and ‘‘area under
the forage crop’’ were correlated to only two already selected variables and were
thus included. All other variables (arable land, area of woodland or forests, area of
bushes, area of non-agricultural land, number of oxen, and number of horses) were
discarded because they had at least three correlated variables in the ﬁnal set. As a
result of this process 14 variables were discarded and only 11 were kept for analysis.
The high level of correlation between the variables means that a lot of information is
redundant, conﬁrming the view that typiﬁcation surveys should contain relatively
few questions but many observations (Escobar and Berdegué, 1990).
The 11 selected variables were then used to construct the factors using principal
components analysis. Depending on the criteria used a variable number of factors
could be retained. When Kaiser’s criterion (Eigenvalue > 1) was used four factors were

148

C. Köbrich et al. / Agricultural Systems 76 (2003) 141–157

retained. On the other hand the residual correlation rule suggested extracting eight
factors, while the straight-line rule suggested retaining six factors. Considering that a
strict selection of correlated variables had been made it was decided that a rather
large number of factors should be retained and thus the ﬁrst seven were extracted,
explaining 85.4% of the total observed variation and at least 70% of every original
variable’s variation.
The seven retained factors were used in for cluster analysis using Ward’s minimum
variance criterion as the clustering method (SAS, 1985). This method optimises the
minimum variance within clusters and it tends to ﬁnd (or create) clusters of relatively equal sizes and shapes as hyper-spheres. It works by joining those groups or
cases that result in the minimum increase in the within-groups sum of squares or the
1
error sum of squares ESS ¼ x2i  nðSx
2 (Ward, 1963; Aldenderfer and Blashﬁeld,
iÞ
1984). When compared to the other variants of hierarchical agglomerative methods,
Ward’s method generates clearer solutions (Aldenderfer and Blashﬁeld, 1984). The
squared Euclidean distance (the sum of the squared diﬀerences in values for each
variable) was used to measure the interval between observations. The dendrogram in
Fig. 1 shows the sequence by which the observations and clusters were merged. For
the study an ideal a priori distribution would have been a small number of similarly
sized groups and no clusters formed by single farms. In this sense the cutting line B
(Fig. 1) shows a subjective partition which tries to balance the number of clusters
with the number of lost observations. That line creates ﬁve clusters (farms 1–27, 28–
50, 51–57, 58–60 and 62–63) while ﬁve farms remain unclassiﬁed. Despite forming a
cluster, the farms 62 and 63 should probably be discarded as their relevance to the
whole sample is rather limited. It can also be seen that if the line is shifted to the left
(line A) eight clusters are formed (three with only two observations) with six farms
still remaining unclassiﬁed. Shifting the line to the right (line C) merges farm 61 with
farms 58–60. A further shift to the right (line D) creates one very large cluster comprising 50 farms and two small ones which was not appropriate for the research project.
Following a more formal approach, both the distance coeﬃcient and the increase
in its size were plotted against the number of clusters. It was seen that until 18
clusters remained, the distance between adjoining clusters was small and fairly constant, without important jumps. Then the increase in the value of coeﬃcient became
bigger, but no meaningful jump was observed until 14 clusters were formed.
Accordingly, this method suggests that line A (Fig. 1) gives the appropriate number
of clusters for this sample. Finally when Mojena’s stopping rule was used (setting k
at 1.25), two clusters and six lost observations were generated (line E); but when
k was set at 2.75 or 3.00 it generated one very large cluster, two very small clusters
and one unclassiﬁed observation (line F).
To determine which of these cutting lines is more appropriate to determine the
farming systems typology, the results have to be examined from the point of view of
the research objectives. Mojena’s stopping rule is not very strict as it is trying to ﬁnd
diﬀerences between individuals of an apparently homogenous population. The Chilean application, however, has contrasting situation as groups with maximum similarities among individuals within a group are being created from a heterogeneous
population. Thus the line C in Fig. 1 was deﬁned as the cutting line.

C. Köbrich et al. / Agricultural Systems 76 (2003) 141–157

149

Fig. 1. Dendrogram showing the full history of cluster construction and six possible cutting lines (Chile).

On comparing the clusters it was seen that labour variables were very important in
diﬀerentiating all clusters (Table 1). The largest single diﬀerence between cluster 1
(farms 1–27) and cluster 2 (farms 28–50) was the availability of female labour, while
male labour makes a distinctive diﬀerence between these two clusters and cluster 3

150

C. Köbrich et al. / Agricultural Systems 76 (2003) 141–157

Table 1
Comparison of selected clusters of farms for the Chilean application
Cluster 1

Cluster 2

Cluster 3

Cluster 4

Cluster 5

Farmer on farm
Additional labour

One year
One woman

One year
Marginal

One year
Two men

Half a year
Marginal

Farm size
Herd
Arable/available
Crop/arable
Sharecropping

Small
Small
56.6%
30.9%
Takes-in

Small
Small
86.5%
17.4%
Takes-in

Medium
Small
67.0%
27.8%
Takes-in

One year
Two women,
two men
Large
Large
19.6%
30.0%
–

Small
Large
–
–
Gives-out

(farms 51–57) and 4 (farms 58–61). The female labour is also relevant but not unique
in distinguishing cluster 4 from 5 (farms 62 and 63). The clusters 1 and 4, specially 4,
have less arable land, as they use labour more intensively and their ratio of crop over
arable land is almost double that of cluster 2; for cluster 3 better availability of
labour allows this ratio to be high. Under a normal rotation for that area, the
expected crop/arable ratio would be 20% (1 year fallow, 1 year crop, and 3 years
rough grazing). Further the farms of type 2 have over 80% of their area under pastures, while around 18% of farm land of types 4 and 5 are under other use (mainly
bushes) or woods.
For the Chilean data the clustering method has been used to deﬁne various farming systems; therefore, an important issue is how valid are the resulting farming
systems types. As cluster analysis allows grouping any collection of individuals or
observations according to any set of variables, it is necessary to determine if the
typology that has been generated represents an observable classiﬁcation and not
the one imposed on the data by the cluster analysis itself. In other words the same
set of observations in diﬀerent contexts may lead to distinct typologies, each of them
suited for a particular purpose. Thus the usefulness of a typology is generally
restricted to the context in which it was constructed. The results of this analysis lead
to farming systems that reﬂect the signiﬁcance of diﬀerent resource endowments and
would therefore elicit diﬀerent responses to the development policies from these
systems. The distribution of farms across counties also showed a distinctive pattern
(Table 2). Although the w2 test should not be used to analyse these results, it could
be seen that the distribution was not random. The farms located in the counties of
Litueche and Marchihue were concentrated in Cluster 2 while 75% of Pumanque’s
farms belonged to Cluster 1 and none to Cluster 2. The observed distribution in
Cluster 1 and Cluster 2 was very diﬀerent from the expected values of around 35–
40% of each county’s farms in Cluster 1 and Cluster 2, respectively. It should be
mentioned that the four unclassiﬁed farms were located in the same county and had
either large areas of vineyards, forage crops, artiﬁcial pasture, or large sheep and/or
goatherds.
Up to this stage no consideration was given to the area currently under a given
crop or the farm’s production pattern and only the variable area of arable land had
been considered. The reason being that crop areas may vary from year to year and

151

C. Köbrich et al. / Agricultural Systems 76 (2003) 141–157
Table 2
Percentage of farms of each county allocated to every cluster: the Chilean application

Litueche
Marchihue
Pumanque
Expected

Cluster 1

Cluster 2

Cluster 3

Cluster 4

Cluster 5

7.7
13.3
75.0
34.3

69.2
60.0
–
42.9

7.7
10.0
–
6.3

7.7
3.3
20.8
11.1

7.7
–
4.2
3.2

thus aﬀect the clustering results. It was therefore judged preferable to use a farm’s
production pattern as a typiﬁcation criterion. The problem is that the inclusion of
one qualitative variable per each production pattern in factor and cluster analysis
would imply a large increase in the number of variables. To avoid this it was decided
that after clustering a cross-tabulation between clusters and production patterns
would put a greater emphasis on present activities. In this way each of these cluster–
production pattern pairs was then identiﬁed as a farming system (FS). Of a maximum possible of 30 FSs, 16 were not empty. Of these only eight FSs had four or
more observations, one had two observations while the other eight had only one
farm (Table 3). Thus, even as the observations for each cluster are spread on various
production patterns, it can be seen that they were concentrated around one or
two production patterns. The distribution of farms in a given cluster across counties
as well as across production pattern was not a random one, that is farms belonging
to each cluster tended to be located in certain counties and have certain production
patterns.
It can therefore be argued that the typiﬁcation process was able to determine some
underlying structure, as county and production pattern pairs had not been considered in the set of clustering variables. Such a non-random distribution strongly
suggests that a valid typology was developed. Such a typology deals with the diﬀerences in resource endowment (mainly natural environment) and can therefore be
used for the assessment of the impact of development policies on the sustainability
of the farming systems. Finally, a multiobjective programming model was constructed for eight of these farms, each representing one of the more relevant types.
As diﬀerent development policies were evaluated using these farm models, it was
seen that the impact showed signiﬁcant diﬀerences between farms. These results
underscore the validity of the typology obtained further.

4. The Pakistan application
The farming systems in Pakistan have been classiﬁed into ten broad crop agroecological zones (PARC, 1980) which were identiﬁed, in the main, on the basis of the
variation in agricultural, climatic and soil conditions. The socio-economic features of
the farming systems were hardly taken into account in the delineation of these zones.
The resulting classiﬁcation is, therefore, very general and has a limited usefulness for

152

C. Köbrich et al. / Agricultural Systems 76 (2003) 141–157

Table 3
Cross-tabulation of farms according to cluster and production pattern: the Chilean application
Production pattern
Wheat–sheep
Wheat–legume–sheep
Wheat–maize–orchard
Wheat–pasture–cattle
Wheat–pasture–cattle–legume–maize
Wheat–vineyard–sheep

Cluster 1
1
7

Cluster 2

Cluster 3

Cluster 4

Cluster 5

4
11
1

1

1

1
1

4
7

1
2

11
4

5
1

deﬁning representative farming systems for modelling purposes. The inclusion of the
socio-economic variables in the classiﬁcation scheme is critical to the identiﬁcation
of representative farming system situations. In presenting the results from the Pakistan data, the methodological nuances are not discussed as most of these have been
covered in the previous two sections.
A representative sample of 72 farmers from the rice–wheat zone of the irrigated
Punjab of Pakistan were interviewed in 1995. This study was concerned with examining the inﬂuence of multiple objectives on introducing ‘new’ crops to the existing
cropping systems in the area. As part of the research strategy, the sample was partitioned into representative farming systems for which diﬀerent mathematical programming models were to be built (Khan, 1998). Cross-sectional data were collected
on ﬁve sets of qualitative and quantitative variables. These variables were related to:
(1) characteristics of the farm and the household; (2) productive resources and related factors such as land ownership, land type, irrigation sources and fragmented
nature of land parcels; (3) farm labour (family labour and permanent hired labour)
and inventory of farm machinery and equipment; (4) combination of farm enterprises (crops grown currently, new crops and livestock numbers); and (5) farm and
oﬀ-farm income sources.
Information on 40 quantitative and qualitative variables, in all, was collected.
Before carrying out principal component analysis (PCA) variables with smaller
than 25% variation coeﬃcient and high correlation coeﬃcients were excluded from
analysis. Nineteen variables were excluded because they were either highly correlated or they had low variation, leading to a considerable reduction in the dimensionality of the typiﬁcation problem. PCA was used to obtain a linear
transformation of the remaining set of variables into factors representing most of
the information contained in the original set of variables (Dunteman, 1989). Principal components with Eigenvalues less than one were dropped, as with each succeeding component a smaller amount of variance is explained and the remaining
components are less likely to be not correlated. The ﬁrst factor explained greater
proportion of variance (14%) as compared to the following one. In total ﬁve factors
are required to explain over half of the total variance. Eight factors were retained
which accounted for 67% of the variation.
Ward’s clustering method was used to construct the typology of farms. The nested
tree structure of the dendrogram suggests that many diﬀerent groups are present

C. Köbrich et al. / Agricultural Systems 76 (2003) 141–157

153

(Fig. 2). Obviously, where to cut the tree in order to obtain an optimal number of
groups is an issue. Using the heuristic procedures, based on an subjective judgement,
the hierarchical tree could rationally be cut into six clusters at the cutting line C
(Fig. 2). The farms 22 and 62 could not be considered as a separate type as the

Fig. 2. Dendrogram showing the full history of cluster construction and six possible cutting lines (Pakistan).

154

C. Köbrich et al. / Agricultural Systems 76 (2003) 141–157

number of farms is insuﬃcient to consider it a relevant group. The cutting line C
therefore creates ﬁve clear clusters with suﬃcient number of farms in each cluster.
Shifting the cutting line B to its left (lines A and B) increases the number of clusters,
whereas on shifting it to its right (lines D, E, and F) that number is reduced.
To examine this issue more formally the distance coeﬃcients and changes in these
coeﬃcients were plotted against the number of clusters. The graphical presentation
highlights the marked ‘‘ﬂattening’’ and ‘‘quantum jump’’ in the value of distance
coeﬃcients (Fig. 2). A marked ‘‘ﬂattening’’ in the squared distances begins at the
sixth cluster solution and becomes ﬂatter with the decreasing number of cluster
solutions. Similarly, a quantum jump between the ﬁve and four cluster solutions was
found which indicates that two dissimilar clusters have been merged. Both of these
procedures suggest that a ﬁve or six cluster solution is appropriate. Finally Mojena’s
stopping rule was used by setting k at 1.25 and eight clusters were generated (line B
in Fig. 2), but when k was set at 2.75 or 3.0 it generated one very large one and
another relatively small cluster (line F).
The procedures used above to deﬁne the number of clusters have shown diﬀerent
preferences for a few to a large number of cluster solutions. The line C was selected
as the best solution considering the needs of this research project and the overall
structure of data shown in the dendrogram (Fig. 2). Each cluster displays some
unique characteristics, which could be used to establish typologies of the main
farming systems. The major characteristics are: (1) operational size of holding; (2)
land types; (3) family and hired labour proﬁles; (4) level of mechanisation; (5)
tenancy status; (6) full-time or part-time managers; (7) livestock numbers; (8)
household farm and oﬀ-farm income sources; (9) distance of farms from roads and
market; (10) land allocated to diﬀerent crops; and (11) joint or single family farms.
Although many similar characteristics resolve the farm typologies across the zone,
but still a signiﬁcant diﬀerence was accounted for in their frequency as well as their
potency as shown in Table 4.
The clusters that have been identiﬁed are diﬀerentiated primarily in terms of the
physical and socio-economic characteristics of farms. The diﬀerences in the size of
holdings, tenancy status, land types, and mechanization level are recognised as
physical factors in the formation of clusters. For instance cluster 1 contains large and
mechanized farms of the rice–wheat farming system. On the contrary cluster 2 consists of farms with smallest land resources that are also dependent on hired labour
and land is cultivated using hired farm machinery. The farms in other clusters have
‘moderate’ to ‘diﬃcult’ or easy access to these resources. The structure of farm
families in terms of their social status, oﬀ-farm employment, tenancy status and
managerial control (sole or jointly managed farms under extended family arrangements) are other criteria used in the formation of these clusters. For instance in
cluster 4 all farms are tenant operated farms with no high social proﬁle, which are
also operated as single family farms with no oﬀ-farm employment opportunities. In
clear contrast to other clusters, all the farmers in cluster 4 hold some social status
among the farming community in the village.
The above diﬀerences in the types of farming systems also reﬂect some signiﬁcant
diﬀerences in farmers’ attitudes towards planning or choice of production activities

155

C. Köbrich et al. / Agricultural Systems 76 (2003) 141–157
Table 4
Comparison of selected clusters of farms: the Pakistan application
Characteristics

Cluster 1

Cluster 2

Cluster 3

Cluster 4

Cluster 5

Number of farms per cluster
Farming experience (years)
Family education index
Distance from village (furlongs)
Distance from road (km)
Operational holding (acres)
Total parcels of land (Nos.)
Family labour (h/day)
Family labour employed oﬀ-farm
Loamy area (%)
Value of farm equipment (Rs)
Area under new crops (%)
Livestock income (Rs/year)
Oﬀ-farm income (Rs/year)
Livestock unit per farm
Farmers with some social status (%)
Full-time farmers (%)
Single family farms (%)
Owner operator farmers (%)
Tenant farmers (%)
Irrigation well owners (%)

14
19.6
0.35
0.67
0.71
28.5
1.9
19.4
37.3
35.0
5185
16.8
43
1086
11.3
0
71.0
43.0
57.0
0
64.0

23
27.4
0.24
1.1
1.26
7.5
1.7
12.5
27.7
26.0
985
16.2
214
457
7.2
0
87.0
87.0
87.0
0
35.0

26
31.2
0.16
3.2
1.11
12.0
1.7
19.4
46.2
61.0
1271
11.7
143
1114
10.9
4.0
96.0
27.0
65.0
0
65.0

5
26.2
0.28
0.90
0.90
21.6
2.4
13.6
41.3
30.4
3800
23.0
104
1385
10.4
100
60.0
27.0
20.0
0
80.0

2
30.0
0.12
2.25
0.50
15.2
1.0
18.0
0
22.2
400
27.0
39
0
4.4
0
100
100
0
100
50.0

under similar circumstances. The clusters 4 and 5 also indicate that where farmers
depend solely on agriculture as a prime source of livelihood, they tend to diversify as
shown by the existence of a large number of enterprises present on the farm. This
observation could imply that farms with above attributes would be more willing to
introduce ‘new’ crops into the existing cropping systems. The farming types identiﬁed through cluster analysis show logical arrangement of complex farm situations
into representative types of the farming systems in the area. Such an outcome lends
further credence to the argument in favour of using numerical clustering procedures
for a farm typology from which relevant farm types can be selected for developing
representative farm models.

5. Concluding observations
In building models for portraying farm decision-making situations, classifying or
typifying farming systems is a fundamental step. The use of multi-variate statistical
techniques, such as cluster analysis, for identifying farm types is not new. However,
in studies that involve the construction of representative mathematical programming
models, there is a tendency to ‘gloss over’ the problem of representative farming
systems or farm types. The two studies reported here have dealt with the issue of
establishing typical farming systems when empirical information on farm and

156

C. Köbrich et al. / Agricultural Systems 76 (2003) 141–157

farmer characteristics exists, and, there is no justiﬁcation for preferring qualitative
or non-quantitative methods over the identiﬁcation of typing farming systems
quantitatively. The approach advocated here can be particularly useful in studies,
especially those in less developed countries, where farm typology has to be derived
from scratch. The models based on classiﬁcation schemes established through rigorous analysis of both qualitative and quantitative data should prove to be reliable
tools for generating recommendation domains in farming systems research.

Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to the following organizations for providing ﬁnancial
support for this research: Fundación FIA of the Chilean Ministry of Agriculture
and Pakistan Agricultural Research Council, Islamabad, Pakistan.

References
Aldenderfer, M.F., Blashﬁeld, R.K., 1984. Cluster Analysis. The International Professional Publishers,
Beverly Hills, USA.
Berdegué, J., Sotomayor, O., Zilleruelo, C., 1990. Metodologı́a de tipiﬁcación y clasiﬁcación de sistemas
de producción campesinos de la Provincia de Ñuble, Chile. In: Escobar, G., Berdegué, J. (Eds.), Tipiﬁcación de Sistemas de Producción Agrı́cola. Red Internacional de Metodologı́as de Investigación en
Sistemas de Producción, Santiago, Chile, pp. 85–117.
Byerlee, D., Collinson, M., Perrin, R., Winkelmann, D., Biggs, S., Moscardi, E., Martinez, J.C., Harrington, L., Benjamin, A., 1980. Planning Technologies Appropriate to Farmers—Concepts and Procedures. Centro Internacional de Mejoramiento de Maiz y Trigo, Mexico.
Comrey, A.L., Lee, H.B., 1992. A First Course in Factor Analysis. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers, Hillsdale, NJ, USA.
Douglas, C., 1990. Clasiﬁcación de sistemas de ﬁncas en el Caribe Oriental. In: Escobar, G., Berdegué, J.
(Eds.), Tipiﬁcación de Sistemas de Producción Agrı́cola. Red Internacional de Metodologı́as de Investigación en Sistemas de Producción, Santiago, Chile, pp. 233–248.
Duarte, O.A., 1990. Tipiﬁcación de ﬁncas en la comarca de San Gil, Colombia, con base en una encuesta
dinámica. In: Escobar, G., Berdegué, J. (Eds.), Tipiﬁcación de Sistemas de Producción Agrı́cola. Red
Internacional de Metodologı́as de Investigación en Sistemas de Producción, Santiago, Chile, pp. 201–
220.
Dunteman, G.H., 1989. Principal Component Analysis (Sage University Paper series on Quantitative
Application in the Social Sciences). Sage, Beverly Hills, USA.
Escobar, G., Berdegué, J., 1990. Conceptos y metodologı́a para la tipiﬁcación de sistemas de ﬁncas: la
experiencia de RIMISP. In: Escobar, G., Berdegué, J. (Eds.), Tipiﬁcación de Sistemas de Producción
Agrı́cola. Red Internacional de Metodologı́as de Investigación en Sistemas de Producción, Santiago,
Chile, pp. 13–43.
Escobar, G., Berdegué, J., 1990. Tipiﬁcación de Sistemas de Producción Agrı́cola, 1990. Red Internacional de Metodologı́as de Investigación en Sitemas de Produción, Santiago, Chile.
Gebauer, R.H., 1987. Socio-economic classiﬁcation of farm households—conceptual, methodical and
empirical considerations. European Review of Agricultural Economics 14, 261–283.
Hardiman, R.T., 1990. Use of cluster analysis for identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of farming systems in
Qingyang County, Central North China. Agricultural Systems 33, 115–125.
Khan, M., 1998. Farmers’ Objectives and the Choice of New Crops in the Irrigated Farming Systems of
Pakistan’s Punjab. PhD thesis, Reading, UK, Department of Agriculture, The University of Reading.

C. Köbrich et al. / Agricultural Systems 76 (2003) 141–157

157

Kim, J., 1970. Factor analysis. In: Nie, N.H., Hull, C.H., Jenkins, J.G., Steinberger, K., Bent, D.H.
(Eds.), Statistical Package for the Social Sciences. McGraw Hill Book Company, New York, USA, pp.
468–473.
Köbrich, C., 1997. The Construction and Use of Compromise Programming Models to Measure the
Impact of Development Policies on the Sustainability of Peasant Farming Systems in Central Chile.
PhD thesis, Reading, UK, Department of Agriculture, The University of Reading.
Kostrowicki, J., 1977. Agricultural typology concept and method. Agricultural Systems 2, 33–45.
Landı́n, R., 1990. Tipiﬁcación de cuencas lecheras en Ecuador. In: Escobar, G., Berdegué, J. (Eds.),
Tipiﬁcación de Sistemas de Producción Agrı́cola. Red Internacional de Metodologı́as de Investigación
en Sistemas de Producción, Santiago, Chile, pp. 167–179.
Lawley, D.N., Maxwell, A.E., 1971. The scope of factor analysis. In: Factor Analysis as a Statistical
Method. Butterworths, London, UK, pp. 1–5.
Martı́nez, E., Ortı́z, A., Reyes, L., 1990. Caracterización de los sistemas de producción minifundistas de la
parte alta de la cuanca del rı́o Achiguate, Guatemala. In: Escobar, G., Berdegué, J. (Eds.), Tipiﬁcación
de Sistemas de Producción Agrı́cola. Red Internacional de Metodologı́as de Investigación en Sistemas
de Producción, Santiago, Chile, pp. 221–231.
Milligan, G.W., Cooper, M.C., 1985. An examination of procedures for determining the number of clusters in a data set. Psychometrika 50, 159–179.
Mojena, R., 1977. Hierarchical grouping methods and stopping rules: an evaluation. The Computer
Journal 20, 359–363.
PARC, 1980. Agro-ecological Regions of Pakistan. Islamabad, Social Sciences and Plant Sciences Divisions. Pakistan Agricultural Research Council of Pakistan.
Perevolotsky, A., 1990. Goat production systems in Piura, Peru: a multidisciplinary analysis. Agricultural
Systems 32, 55–81.
SAS, 1985. SAS User’s Guide: Statistics. Version 5 Edition. Statistical Analysis System Inc, Cary, USA.
Sokal, R.R., 1977. Clustering and classiﬁcation: background and current directions. In: van Ryzin, J.
(Ed.), Classiﬁcation and Clustering. Proceedings of an Advanced Seminar Conducted by the Mathematics Research Centre, The University of Wisconsin, Madison, 1976. pp. 1–15.
Spedding, C.R.W., 1988. An Introduction to Agricultural Systems. Elsevier, London, UK.
Ward, J., 1963. Hierarchical grouping to optimise an objective function. Journal of American Statistical
Association 58, 236–244.

